The believer's relation to these messages is neither a relation to historical truth (probability) nor yet that to a doctrine consisting of 'truths of reason'. There is such a thing.--(We have quite different attitudes even to different species of what we call fiction!) MS 120 83 c: 8-9.12.1937* 52 Page 38 You cannot write more truly about yourself than you are. That is the difference between writing about yourself and writing about external things. You write about yourself from your own height. Here you don't stand on stilts or on a ladder but on your bare feet. MS 120 103 c: 12.12.1937 Page 38 A great blessing for me to be able to work today. But I so easily forget all my blessings! I am reading: "& no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost."†i And it is true: I cannot call him Lord; because that says absolutely nothing to me. I could call him "the paragon", "God" even or rather: I can understand it when he is so called; but I cannot utter the word "Lord" meaningfully. Because I do not believe that he will come to judge me; because that says nothing to me. And it could only say something to me if I were to live quite differently. What inclines even me to believe in Christ's resurrection? I play as it were with the thought.--If he did not rise from the dead, then he decomposed in the grave like every human being. He is dead & decomposed. In that case he is a teacher, like any other & can no longer help; & we are once more orphaned & alone. And have to make do with wisdom & speculation. It is as though we are in a hell, where we can only†a dream & are shut out from heaven, roofed in as it were. But if I am to be REALLY redeemed,--I need certainty--not wisdom, dreams, speculation--and this certainty is faith. And faith is faith in what my heart, my soul, needs, not my speculative intellect. For my soul, with its passions, as it were with its flesh & blood, must be redeemed, not my abstract mind. Perhaps one may Page Break 39 say: Only love can believe the Resurrection. Or: it is love that believes the Resurrection. One might say: redeeming love believes even in the Resurrection; holds fast even to the Resurrection. What fights doubt is as it were redemption. Holding fast to it must be holding fast to this belief. So this means: first be redeemed & hold on tightly to your redemption (keep hold of your redemption)--then you will see that what you are holding on to is this belief. So this can only come about if you no longer support yourself on this†a earth but suspend yourself from heaven. Then everything is different and it is 'no wonder' if you can then do what now you cannot do. (It is true that someone who is suspended looks like someone who is standing but the interplay of forces within him is nevertheless a quite different one & hence he is able to do quite different things than can one who stands.) MS 120 108 c: 12.12.1937* Page 39 53 Freud's idea: in madness the lock is not destroyed, only altered; the old key can no longer open it, but a differently configured key could do so. MS 120 113: 2.1.1938 Page 39 A Bruckner symphony can be said to have two beginnings: the beginning of the first idea & the beginning of the second idea. These two ideas stand to each other not as blood relations, but†b as man & wife. Page 39 Bruckner's Ninth is a sort of protest against Beethoven's, & because of this†c becomes bearable, which as a sort of imitation it would not be. It stands to Beethoven's Ninth very much as Lenau's Faust to Goethe's, which means as the Catholic to the Enlightenment Faust. etc. etc. MS 120 142: 19.2.1938 Page 39 Nothing is so difficult as not deceiving yourself. MS 120 283: 7.4.1938 Longfellow: In the elder days of art, Builders wrought with greatest care Each minute & unseen part, For the gods are†i everywhere. (This might serve as my motto.) Page 39 MS 120 289: 20.4.1938 Page Break 40 Phenomena akin to language in music or architecture. Significant irregularity--in Gothic e.g. (I have in mind too the towers of St. Basil's Cathedral.) Bach's music is more like language than Mozart's & Haydn's. The double bass recitative in the 4th