University of Bergen†*, has newly transcribed from the manuscripts all the remarks. In the process a few mistakes in the earlier editions were corrected, mainly places which had been difficult to read correctly. Some of these corrections had already been noticed by the original editor in the course of the years. Page xii The new edition contains all the remarks of the earlier editions and only those. However they appear here edited more completely and more faithfully to the original. Wittgenstein usually wrote his remarks in short sections, separated from each other by one or more blank lines. Some of the remarks printed in the earlier editions consisted simply of "extracts" from these sections, i.e. often parts were left out which did not seem relevant to the editor. This is a judgement that might appear controversial to some; for this reason in the present edition all such passages have been completed so as to comprise the totality of the section. Another new feature is that variants are retained in footnotes--formerly the editor had made a choice. The musical notation and the drawings are this time reproduced in facsimile; thanks are due to Michael Biggs of the University of Hertfordshire for his advice and help. Many will be pleased that the sources of the remarks are cited.†** (See Alois Pichler's Editorial Note for more details about editing.) Page Break xiii At the end of the remarks there is a poem which was in the possession of Hofrat 9 Ludwig Hänsel, to whom Wittgenstein had given it. We assume that it was written by Wittgenstein. Here the poem is reproduced as a facsimile of the surviving typescript. There is supposed to have been a handwritten version too, which has probably been lost. It is not known when the poem was composed. The Wittgenstein Trustees thank Prof. Dr Hermann Hänsel, Vienna, for making this unique document available. Page xiii Alois Pichler and I thank the Wittgenstein Archive of the University of Bergen for professional and technical support. Helsinki, November 1993 Georg Henrik von Wright Page Break xiv Page xiv History of the Edition: The Vermischte Bemerkungen were first published in 1977. In 1978 a new edition appeared with supplementary remarks. The edition of 1978 was corrected and expanded in Volume 8 in the complete works, 1984; between "Es ist als hätte ich mich verirrt (...)" and "Sind alle Leute große Menschen? (...)" (1978: p. 93) was inserted the remark "Je weniger sich Einer selbst kennt (...)" (1984: p. 516). For this reason the latter remark is not included in the English edition of 1980. The present new edition contains all the remarks of the edition of 1984 and--apart from the completion of the context to include the full section and the noting of the variants--only those remarks. Page xiv Sources: The manuscript source is given after each remark: "MS #" refers to the manuscript number in Georg Henrik von Wright's catalogue of the Nachlaß†*. Following the manuscript number the page is cited on which the remark begins (Folio pagination is distinguished according to recto and verso by "r" and "v"; identical pagination is distinguished according to left and right by "a" and "b".) The date of writing is also given, where this can be ascertained. Page xiv Arrangement: The remarks are arranged chronologically; this has led to fairly extensive rearrangements in relation to the earlier editions. For remarks which follow immediately one after another in the original, the source has been given after the last of those remarks, so that the original grouping may be clear in this edition. Page xiv 10 Context: All remarks, i.e. all passages separated from each other by blank Page Break xv lines and not indented, correspond to whole sections in the original; whereas the former editions sometimes contained only parts of sections, the complete section is reproduced here. Completions of this sort are marked in the citation of sources with an asterisk * (see e.g. the first remark). Further sections were added to the remark "Architecture immortalizes (...)" (1978: p. 133; 1984: p. 548; here p. 74), as they constitute different versions of it and in the manuscript are on the same or the previous side. In the earlier editions this passage was marked with "Several variants in the manuscript". With remarks which belong together and which are here edited under the same indication of source, but which in the original are separated from each other by one or more sections not published here, the omission of the relevant section(s) is indicated with (...) (e.g. as on p. 75). Page xv Code: Several of the published remarks are written in the original partly or wholly