collection of examples. Page 94 Reflect in this connection that in a dictionary one would perhaps like to give such descriptions of use, but in reality one gives only a few examples & explanations. But also that no more than this is necessary. What use could we make of an enormously long description?--Well, it would be no use to us if it dealt with the use of words in languages already familiar to us. But what if we came across such a description of the use of an Assyrian word? And in what language? Let's say in another language already known to us.--In this description the word "sometimes" will frequently occur, or "often", or "usually", or "nearly always" or "almost never". Page 94 It is difficult to form a good picture of a description of this sort. Page Break 95 And what I basically am after all is a painter, & often a very bad painter. MS 138 30b: 17.3.1949 Page 95 What is it like when people do not have the same sense of humour? They do not react properly to each other. It is as though there were a custom among certain people to throw someone a ball, which he is supposed to catch & throw back; but certain people might not throw it back, but put it in their pocket instead. Page 95 Or what is it like for someone to have no idea how to fathom another's taste? MS 138 32b: 20.5.1949 Page 95 A picture that is firmly rooted in us may indeed be compared to superstition, but it may be said too that we always have to reach some sort of firm ground, be it a picture, or not, so that a picture at the root of all our thinking is to be respected & not treated as a superstition. MS 138 32b: 20.5.1949 113 Page 95 It is not unheard of†a that†b someone's character may be influenced by the external world (Weininger). For that only means that, as we know from experience, people change with circumstances. If someone asks: How could the environment coerce someone, the ethical in someone?--the answer is that he may indeed say "No human being has to give way to coercion",†i but all the same under such circumstances†c someone will do such & such. 'You don't HAVE to, I can show you a (different) way out,--but you won't take it.' MS 173 17r: 30.3.1950 Page 95 I do not think that Shakespeare can be set alongside any other poet. Was he perhaps a creator of language rather than a poet? Page 95 I could only stare in wonder at Shakespeare; never do anything with him. Page 95 I am deeply suspicious of most of Shakespeare's admirers. I think the trouble is that, in western culture at least, he stands alone, & so, one can only place him by placing him wrongly. Page Break 96 It is not as though S. portrayed human types well & were in that respect true to life. He is not true to life. But he has such a supple hand & such individual brush strokes. [[sic , ?]] that each one of his characters looks significant, worth looking at. Page 96 "Beethoven's great heart"--no one could say "Shakespeare's great heart". 'The supple hand that created new natural forms of language' would seem to me nearer the mark. Page 96 The poet cannot really say of himself "I sing as the bird sings"--but perhaps S. could have said it of himself. MS 173 35r: 12.4.1950 or later 114 Page 96 One & the same theme has a different character in the minor than in the major, but it is quite wrong to speak generally of a character belonging to the minor. (In Schubert the major often sounds sadder than the minor.†a) And similarly, I think, it is idle & futile for the understanding of painting to speak of the characters of the individual colours. In doing so one really thinks only of special applications. The fact that green has one effect as the colour of a table cloth, red another, licenses no conclusion about their effect in a picture. MS 173 69r: 1950 Page 96 I do not think Shakespeare could have reflected on the 'lot of the poet'. Page 96 Neither could he regard himself as a prophet or teacher of humanity. People regard him with amazement almost as a spectacle of nature. They do not have the feeling that this brings them into contact with a great human being. Rather with a phenomenon. Page 96 I think that, in order to enjoy a poet, you have to like the culture to which he belongs as well. If you are indifferent to this or repelled by it, your admiration