constitution<.">†3 On the contrary there is absolutely no reason to marvel at such things; because they are such everyday occurrences. If primitive human beings must marvel at them, how much more so dogs & monkeys. Or is it being assumed that human beings suddenly awoke as it were & noticed these things which had always been there & were understandably amazed? Well, one might even assume something like this; not however that they became aware of these things for the first time, but rather that they suddenly began to marvel at them. But that too has nothing to do with their being primitive. Unless we call it primitive not to marvel at things, in which case it is precisely the people of today & Renan himself who are primitive, if he believes that scientific explanation could enhance wonderment. As though today lightning were more commonplace or less astounding than 2000 years ago. In order to marvel human beings--and perhaps peoples--have to wake up. Science is a way of sending them off to sleep again. Page 7 I.e. it is simply false to say: of course, these primitive peoples had to marvel Page Break 8 at everything. But perhaps right that these people did marvel at everything around them.--To think they had to marvel at them is a primitive superstition. (Like that of thinking that they had to fear all the forces of nature & that we of course do not have†a to fear. On the other hand experience may show that certain primitive tribes are very strongly inclined to fear natural phenomena.--But we cannot exclude the possibility that highly civilized peoples will become liable to this very same fear again & their civilization and the knowledge of science will†b not protect them from this. All the same it is true that the spirit in which science is carried on nowadays is not compatible with fear of this kind) Page 8 What Renan calls the bon sens précoce of the semitic races (an idea that I †c already entertained a long time ago) is their unpoetic mentality, which heads 20 straight for what is concrete. Which is characteristic of my philosophy. Things are right before our eyes†d, not covered by any veil.--This is where religion & art part company. MS 109 200: 5.11.1930 Page 8 Sketch for a Foreword†4 This book is written for those†e who are in sympathy with the spirit in which it is written.†f This spirit is, I believe, different from that of the†g prevailing European and American civilization. The spirit of this civilization the expression of which is the industry, architecture, music, of present day†h fascism & socialism, is a spirit that is alien & uncongenial†i to the author. This is not a value judgement. It is not as though I did not know that†j what today represents itself as architecture is not architecture & not†k as though he did not approach what is called modern music with the greatest mistrust (without understanding its language), but the disappearance of the arts does not justify a disparaging judgement on a whole segment of humanity. For in these times genuine & strong characters simply turn away from the field of the arts & towards other things & somehow the value of the individual finds expression. Not, to be sure, in the way it would at a time of Great Culture. Culture is like a great organization which assigns to each of its members his place, at which he Page Break 9 can work in the spirit of the whole, and his strength can with a certain justice be measured by his success as understood within that whole. In a time without culture, however, forces are fragmented and the strength of the individual is wasted through the overcoming of opposing forces & frictional resistances; it is not manifest in the distance travelled but rather perhaps in the heat generated through the overcoming of frictional resistances. But energy is still energy & even if the spectacle afforded by this age is not the coming into being of a great work of culture in which the best contribute to the same great end, so much as the unimposing spectacle of a crowd whose best members pursue purely private ends, still we must not forget that the spectacle is not what matters. Even if it is clear to me then that the disappearance of a culture does not signify the disappearance of human value but simply of certain means of expressing this value, still the fact remains that I contemplate the current of European civilization without sympathy, without understanding its aims if any. So I am really writing for friends who are scattered throughout the corners of the globe. Page 9 21 It is all one to me whether the typical western scientist understands or appreciates my work since in any case he does not understand the spirit in which I write. Page 9 Our civilization is characterized by the word progress. Progress is its form, it is not one of its properties that it makes progress. Typically it constructs. Its activity is to construct a more and more complicated structure. And even clarity is only a