who esteem one, & at the same time love one, can make such behaviour†d easy for one.†e 83 It's a question of envy of course. And anyone who feels it, ought to keep saying to himself: 'It's a mistake! It's a mistake!--" MS 134 100: 4.4.1947 Page 66 In the train of every idea that costs a lot come a host of cheap ones: amongst them even a few that are useful. Page 66 Sometimes one sees ideas, as an astronomer sees stars in the far distance. (Or at least it seems so.) MS 134 105: 5.4.1947 Page 66 If I had written a good sentence, & they were by accident two rhyming lines,†f†g†h this would be a blemish. Page Break 67 There is much that could be learned from Tolstoy's false†a theorizing that the work of art conveys 'a feeling'.--And you really might call it, if not the expression of a feeling, an expression of feeling, or a felt expression. And you might say too that people who understand it to that extent 'resonate' with it, respond to it. You might say: The work of art does not seek to convey something else, just itself. As, if I pay someone a visit, I don't wish simply to produce such & such feelings in him, but above all to pay him a visit, & naturally I also want to be well received. And it does start to be really absurd, to say, the artist wishes that, what he feels when writing, the other should feel when reading. Presumably I can think I understand a poem (e.g.), understand it in the way its author would wish,--but what he may have felt in writing it, that doesn't concern me at all. MS 134 106: 5.4.1947 Page 67 Just as I cannot write verse, so too I can write prose only up to a certain point, & no further. There is a quite definite limit to my prose, & I can no more overstep it, than I would be able to write a poem. This is how my equipment is constituted; it is the only equipment available to me. It is like someone's saying: In this game I can attain only this level of perfection, & not that. MS 134 108: 5.4.1947 Page 67 It is possible†b, that everyone who executes an important work, sees before his mind's eye, dreams of, a continuation of, a sequel to, his work; but it would be 84 remarkable all the same if it really turned out as he dreamed. Nowadays not believing in your own dreams is of course easy. MS 134 120: 7.4.1947 Page 67 Nietzsche writes somewhere,†40 that even the best poets & thinkers have written mediocre & bad stuff, but have just separated off the good. But it is not quite like that. It's true that along with the roses a gardener has manure & sweepings & straw in his garden, but they are distinguished not only†c by value, but above all too by†d function in the garden. What looks like a bad sentence can be the germ of a good one. MS 134 124: 8.4.1947 Page Break 68 The faculty of 'taste' cannot create a new organism, only rectify one that is already there. Taste loosens screws & tightens screws, it doesn't create a new original work.†41 Page 68 Taste rectifies, it doesn't give birth.†a Page 68 Taste makes ACCEPTABLE. Page 68 (Hence, I think, a great creator needs no†b taste: the child is born into the world well formed.) Polishing is sometimes the job of taste, sometimes not. I have taste. Page 68 The†c most refined taste has nothing to do with creative power. Page 68 Taste is refinement of sensibility; but sensibility does not act, it merely assimilates. Page 68 85 I cannot†d judge whether I have only taste, or originality as well. The former I can see distinctly, but not the latter, or only quite indistinctly. And perhaps it has to be like that, & you see only what you have, not what you are. Someone who does not lie is original enough. For, after all, the originality that would be worth wishing for, cannot be a sort of trick, or an idiosyncracy, however marked. In fact it is already a seed of good originality not to want to be what you are not. And all that has been said before much better by others. Page 68