every species of tree is a 'tree' in a different sense of the word. I.e. Don't let yourself be misled by our saying they are all melodies. They are steps along a path that leads from something you would not call a melody to something else that you 70 again would not call one. If you simply look at the sequences of notes & the changes of key all these structures no doubt appear on the same level. But if you look at the field of force in which they stand (and hence at their significance), you will be inclined to say: Here melody is something quite different than there (here it has a different origin, plays a different role, inter alia. MS 131 2: 10.8.1946 Page 54 The idea working its way towards the light. MS 131 19: 11.8.1946 Page 54 The remark by Jucundus in 'The Lost Laugh'†34, that his religion consisted in: his knowing, if things are going well for him now,†a that his fate could take a turn for the worse--this actually is an expression of the same religion as the saying "The Lord hath given, the Lord hath taken away". MS 131 27: 12.8.1946 Page 54 It is hard to understand yourself properly since something that you might be doing out of generosity & goodness is the same as you may be doing out of cowardice or indifference. To be sure, one may act in such & such a way from true love, but also from deceitfulness & from a cold heart too. Similarly not all moderation is goodness. And only if I could be submerged in religion might these doubts be silenced. For only religion could destroy vanity & penetrate every nook & cranny. MS 131 38: 14.8.1946 Page 54 What I want to say then is: Someone who--e.g.--cannot EXPERIENCE Page Break 55 the word "pas" in "je ne sais pas" as "step", cannot be taught an expression of voice†a by being told "speak it with this meaning". If you are reading aloud and want to read well, you accompany the words with more vivid images. At least it is often like that. Sometimes though ["To Corinth from Athens..."]†35 it is the punctuation, i.e., the precise intonation & the length of the pauses that is all that matters to us. MS 131 43: 14.8.1946* Page 55 It is remarkable how hard we find it to believe something the truth of which we do not see for ourselves. If e.g. I hear expressions of admiration for Shakespeare made by the distinguished men of several centuries, I can never rid myself of a 71 suspicion that praising him has been a matter of convention, even though I have to tell myself that this is not the case. I need the authority of a Milton to be really convinced. In his case I take it for granted that he was incorruptible.--But of course I don't mean to deny by this that an enormous amount of praise has been & still is lavished on Shakespeare without understanding & for specious reasons by a thousand professors of literature. MS 131 46: 15.8.1946 Page 55 Grasping the difficulty in its depth is what is hard. For if you interpret it in a shallow way the difficulty just remains. It has to be pulled out by the root; & that means, you have to start thinking about these things in a new way. The change is as decisive e.g. as that from the alchemical to the chemical way of thinking.--The new way of thinking is what is so hard to establish. Page 55 Once it†b is established the old problems disappear; indeed it becomes hard to recapture them. For they are embedded in the way we express ourselves; & if we clothe ourselves in a new form of expression, the old problems are discarded along with the old garment.†c MS 131 48: 15.8.1946 Page 55 The hysterical fear of the atom bomb the public now has, or at least expresses, is almost a sign that here for once a really salutary discovery has been made. At least the fear gives the impression of being fear in the face of a really effective bitter medicine. I cannot rid myself of the thought: if there Page Break 56 were not something good here, the philistines would not be making an outcry. But perhaps this too is a childish idea. For all I can mean really is that the bomb creates the prospect of the end, the destruction of a ghastly evil, of disgusting soapy water science and certainly that is not an unpleasant thought; but who is to say what would come after such a destruction? The people now making speeches against the production of the bomb are undoubtedly the dregs of the intelligentsia,