something feminine about this outlook?) MS 119 83: 7.10.1937 Page 36 Doing this work I am†b in the same state as that of many people when they struggle in vain†c to recall a name; we say in such a case: "think of something else, then it will come to you"--& similarly I had constantly to think of something else†i so that what I had long been searching for could occur†d to me. MS 119 108: 14.10.1937 Page 36 The origin & the primitive form of the language game is a reaction; only from this can the more complicated forms grow. Language--I want to say--is a refinement, 'in the beginning was the deed'†ii. MS 119 146: 21.10.1937 Page 36 Kierkegaard writes: If Christianity were so easy and cosy, why would God have moved Heaven & Earth in his Scripture, threatened eternal punishments--. --Question: But why is this Scripture so unclear then? If we want to warn someone of a terrible danger, do we do it by giving him a riddle to solve, whose solution is perhaps the warning?--But who is to say that the Scripture really is unclear: isn't it possible that it was essential in this case to tell a riddle? That a more direct warning, on the other hand, would necessarily have had the wrong effect? God has four people recount the life of the incarnate God, each one differently, & contradicting each other--but can't we say: It is important that this narrative should not have more than quite middling historical plausibility, just so that this†21 should not be taken as the essential, decisive thing. So that the letter should not be believed more strongly than is proper & the spirit should receive its due. I.e.: What you are supposed to see cannot be communicated even by the Page Break 37 best, most accurate, historian; therefore a mediocre account suffices, is even to be preferred. For that too can tell you what you are supposed to be told. (Roughly in the way a mediocre stage set can be better than a sophisticated one, painted trees better than real ones,--which distract attention from what matters.) The Spirit puts what is essential, essential for your life, into these words. The point is precisely that you are SUPPOSED to see clearly only what even this representation clearly shows. (I am not sure how far all this is exactly in the spirit of Kierkegaard.) MS 119 151: 22.10.1937 51 Page 37 In religion it must be the case that corresponding to every level of devoutness there is a form of expression that has no sense at a lower level. For those still at the lower level this doctrine, which means something at the higher level, is null & void; it can only be understood wrongly, & so these words are not valid for such a person. Paul's doctrine of election by grace for instance is at my level irreligiousness, ugly non-sense. So it is not meant for me since I can only apply wrongly the picture offered me. If it is a holy & good picture, then it is so for a quite different level, where it must be applied in life quite differently than I could apply it. MS 120 8: 20.11.1937 Page 37 Christianity is not based on a historical truth, but presents us with a (historical) narrative & says: now believe! But not believe this report with the belief that†22 is appropriate to a historical report,--but rather: believe, through thick & thin & you can do this only as the outcome of a life. Here you have a message!--don't treat it as you would another historical message! Make a quite different place for it in your life.--There is no paradox about that! Page 37 If I realized how mean & petty I am, I should become more modest. Nobody can say with truth of himself that he is filth. For if I do say it, though it can be true in a sense, still I cannot myself be penetrated by this truth: otherwise I should have to go mad, or change myself. Had coffee with A.R.†23; it was not as it used to be, but it was not bad either. Queer as it sounds: the historical accounts of the Gospels might, in the historical sense, be demonstrably false, & yet belief would lose nothing through this: but not because it has to do with 'universal truths of reason'! Page Break 38 rather, because historical proof (the historical proof-game) is irrelevant to belief. This message (the Gospels) is seized on by a human being believingly (i.e. lovingly): That is the certainty of this "taking-for-true", nothing else.