himself, stretch some different muscles. MS 118 45r c: 1.9.1937 Page 32 Caught a bit of a chill & unable to think. Ghastly weather.-- Christianity is not a doctrine, not, I mean, a theory about what has happened & will happen to the human soul, but a description of something that actually takes place in human life. For 'recognition of sin' is an actual occurrence & so is despair & so is redemption through faith. Those who speak of it (like Bunyan), are simply describing what has happened to them; whatever gloss someone may want to put on it! MS 118 56r c: 4.9.1937* Page 32 When I imagine a piece of music, something I do every day & often, I--always I think--rhythmically grind my upper & lower front teeth together. I have noticed it before but usually it takes place quite unconsciously. Moreover it's as though the notes in my imagination were produced by this movement. I think this way of hearing music in the imagination may be very common. I can of course also imagine music without moving my teeth, but then the notes are much more blurred, much less clear, less pronounced. MS 118 71v c: 9.9.1937 Page 32 If certain graphic propositions for instance are laid down for human beings as dogmas governing thinking, namely in such a way that opinions are not thereby determined, but the expression of opinions†a is completely controlled, this will have a very strange effect. People will live under an absolute, palpable tyranny, yet without being able to say they are not free.†i I think the Catholic Church does something like this. For dogma is expressed in the form of an assertion & is unshakable, & at the same time any practical Page Break 33 opinion can be made to accord with it; admittedly this is easier in some cases, 47 more difficult in others. It is not a wall setting limits to belief, but like a brake which in practice however serves the same purpose;†a†b almost as though someone attached a weight to your foot to limit your freedom of movement.†c This is how dogma becomes irrefutable & beyond the reach of attack. MS 118 86v: 11.9.1937 Page 33 With thinking too there is a time for ploughing & a time for harvesting. It gives me satisfaction to write a lot every day. This is childish but that's how it is. MS 118 87r c: 11.9.1937* Page 33 If I am thinking just for myself without wanting to write a book, I jump about all round the topic; that is the only way of thinking that is natural to me. Forcing my thoughts into an ordered sequence is a torment for me. Should I even attempt it now?? I squander untold effort making an arrangement of my thoughts that may have no value whatever. MS 118 94v c: 15.9.1937 Page 33 People have sometimes said to me†d they cannot make any judgement about this or that because they have never learnt philosophy. This is irritating nonsense,†e it is†f being assumed that philosophy is some sort of science. And people speak of it as they might speak of medicine.--What one can say, however, is that people who have never carried out an investigation of a philosophical sort, like most mathematicians for instance, are not equipped with the right optical instruments for that sort of investigation or scrutiny. Almost,†g as someone who is not used to searching in the forest for berries†h will not find any because his eye has not been sharpened for such things & he does not know where you have to be particularly on the lookout for them. Similarly someone unpractised in philosophy passes by all the spots where difficulties lie hidden under the grass, while someone with practice pauses & senses that there is a difficulty here, even though†i he does not yet Page Break 34 see it.--And no wonder, if one knows how long even the practised investigator, who realizes there is a difficulty, has to search in order to find it. If something is well hidden it is hard to find. MS 118 113r: 24.9.1937 48 Page 34 Religious similes can be said to move on the edge of the abyss. B<unyan>'s allegory for instance. For what if we simply add: "and all these traps, swamps, wrong turnings, were planted by the Lord of the Road, the monsters, thieves, robbers were created by him?" Without doubt, that is not the sense of the simile! but this sequel is too obvious! For many & for me it robs the simile of its power.