But more especially if this is--as it were--suppressed. It would be different if it were said openly at every turn: 'I am using this as a simile, but look: it doesn't fit here'. Then you wouldn't feel you were being cheated, that someone were trying to convince you by trickery. You can say to someone for instance: "Thank God for the good you receive but don't complain about the evil,†a as you would of course do if a human being were to do you good and evil by turns." Rules of life are dressed up in pictures. And these pictures can only serve to describe what we are supposed to do, but not to justify it. Because to be a justification they would have to hold good in other respects too. I can say: "Thank these bees for their honey as though they†i were good people who have prepared it for you"; that is intelligible & describes how I wish you to behave. But not: <">. Thank them, for look how good they are!"--since the next moment they may sting you. Religion says: Do this!--Think like that! but it cannot justify this and it only need try to do so to become repugnant; since for every reason it gives, there is a cogent counter-reason. It is more convincing to say: "Think like this!--however strange it may seem.--" Or: "Won't you do this?--repugnant as it is.--" Page 34 Election by grace: It is only permissible to write like this out of the most frightful suffering--& then it means something quite different. But for this reason it is not permissible for anyone to cite it as truth, unless he himself says it in torment.--It simply isn't a theory.--Or as one might also say: if this is truth, it is not the truth it appears at first glance to express. It's less Page Break 35 a theory than a sigh, or a cry. MS 118 117v: 24.9.1937 Page 35 In the course of our conversations Russell would often exclaim: "Logic's hell!"--And this fully expresses what we†a experienced while†b thinking about 49 the problems of logic; namely their immense difficulty. Their hardness--their hard & slippery texture. The primary ground of this experience, I think, was this fact: that each new†c phenomenon of language that we might retrospectively think of†d could show our earlier explanation to be unworkable.†e†f But that is the difficulty Socrates gets caught up in when he tries to give the definition of a concept. Again and again an application of the word emerges that seems not to be compatible with the concept to which other applications have led us. We say: but that isn't how it is!--it is like that though!--& all we can do is keep repeating these antitheses. MS 119 59: 1.10.1937 Page 35 The spring that flows quietly & clearly†g in the Gospels seems to foam in Paul's Epistles. Or that is how it seems to me. Perhaps it is just my own impurity that reads muddiness into it; for why shouldn't this impurity be able to pollute what is clear? But for me it's as though I saw human passion, something like pride or anger, which does not square with the humility of the Gospels. It is as though he really is insisting here on his own person, & doing so moreover as a religious act, something which is foreign to the Gospel. I want to ask--& may this be no blasphemy--: "What would Christ perhaps have said to Paul?" But a fair rejoinder to that would be: What business is that of yours? Look after making yourself more decent! In your present state, you are quite incapable of understanding what may be the truth here. Page 35 In the Gospels--as it seems to me--everything is less pretentious, humbler, simpler. There you find huts;--with Paul a church. There all human beings are equal & God himself is a human being; with Paul there is already something like a hierarchy; honours, and official positions.--That is, as it were, what my NOSE tells me. MS 119 71: 4.10.1937 Page Break 36 Let us be human.-- Page 36 I just took some apples out of a paper bag where they had been lying for a long time; I had to cut off & throw away half of many of them. Afterwards as I was copying out a sentence of mine the second half of which was bad, I at once saw it as a half-rotten apple. And that's how it always is with me. Everything that comes my way becomes for me†a a picture of what I am thinking about. (Is there 50