cools off.†bMS 173 75v: 1950 Page 96 If the believer in God looks around & asks "Where does everything I see come from?" "Where does all that come from?", what he hankers after is Page Break 97 not a (causal) explanation; and the point of his question is that it is the expression of this hankering.†i He is expressing, then, a stance†a towards all explanations.--But how is this manifested in his life? It is the attitude of taking a certain matter seriously, but then at a certain point not taking it seriously after all, & declaring that something else is still more serious. Someone may for instance say that it is a very grave matter that such & such a person has died before he could complete a certain piece of work; & in another 115 sense that is not what matters. At this point one uses the words "in a deeper sense". Really what I should like to say is that here too what is important is not the words you use or what you think while saying them, so much as the difference that they make at different points in your life. How do I know that two people mean the same thing when each says he believes in God? And just the same thing goes for the Trinity. Theology that insists on certain†b words & phrases & prohibits others makes nothing clearer. (Karl Barth) It gesticulates with words, as it were, because it wants to say something & does not know how to express it.†c Practice gives the words their sense. MS 173 92r: 1950 Page 97 A proof of God ought really to be something by means of which you can convince yourself of God's existence. But I think that believers who offered such proofs wanted to analyse & make a case for their 'belief' with their intellect, although they themselves would never have arrived at belief by way of such proofs. "Convincing someone of God's existence" is something you might do by means of a certain upbringing, shaping his life in such & such a way. Life can educate you to "believing in God". And experiences too are what do this but not visions, or other sense experiences, which show us the "existence of this being", but e.g. sufferings of various sorts. And they do not show us God as a sense experience does an object, nor do they give rise to conjectures about him. Experiences, thoughts,--life can force this concept on us. Page 97 So perhaps it is similar to the concept 'object'. MS 174 1v: 1950 Page Break 98 The reason I cannot understand Shakespeare is that I want to find symmetry in all this asymmetry. Page 98 It seems to me as though his pieces are, as it were, enormous sketches, not paintings; as though they were dashed off by someone who could permit himself anything, so to speak. And I understand how someone may admire this & call it supreme art, but I don't like it.--So I can understand someone who stands before those pieces speechless; but someone who admires him as one admires Beethoven, say, seems to me to misunderstand Shakespeare. MS 174 5r: 24.4.1950 or later 116 Page 98 One age misunderstands another; and a petty age misunderstands all the others in its own ugly way. MS 174 5v: 1950 Page 98 How God judges people is something we cannot imagine at all. If he really takes the strength of temptation & the frailty of nature into account, whom can he condemn? But if not, then these two forces simply yield as a result the end for which this person was predestined. In that case he was created so as either to conquer or succumb as a result of the interplay of forces. And that is not a religious idea at all, so much as a scientific hypothesis. So if you want to stay within the religious sphere, you must struggle. MS 174 7v: 1950 Page 98 Look at human beings: One is poison for the other. A mother for her son, and vice versa, etc. etc. But the mother is blind & the son too. Perhaps they have a guilty conscience, but what good does that do them? The child is wicked, but nobody teaches it to be different, & the parents only spoil it with their foolish affection; & how are they supposed to understand this, & how is the child to understand it? They are, so to speak, all wicked & all innocent. MS 174 8r: 1950 Page 98 Philosophy hasn't made any progress?--If someone scratches where it itches, do we have to see progress? isn't it genuine scratching otherwise, or genuine itching? And can't this reaction to the irritation†a go on†b like this for a long time, before a