making the mistake under discussion. Incorruptibility is everything! Page 77 Conglomeration: national sentiment, e.g. MS 136 110b: 14.1.1948* Page 77 Animals come when their names are called. Just like human beings. MS 136 113a: 15.1.1948 Page 77 I ask countless irrelevant questions. If only I can beat my way through this forest! MS 136 117a: 15.1.1948 Page 77 Really I want to slow down the speed of reading with continual†a punctuation marks. For I should like to be read slowly. (As I myself read.) MS 136 128b: 18.1.1948 Page 77 I think Bacon got bogged down in his philosophy & this danger threatens me too. He had a vivid image of a huge building, it disappeared however when he really wanted to get down to details. It was as though his contemporaries had begun to build a great building from the foundations; & as though he had seen something similar in his imagination, the vision of such a building; had seen it as even more imposing than, perhaps, those who were working on the construction. For this an inkling of the method was necessary, but by no means a talent for building work. But the bad Page Break 78 95 thing was that he launched polemical attacks against the real builders & either did not recognize, or did not want to recognize, his limitations. On the other hand it is tremendously hard to see these limitations, & that means, to delineate them clearly. That is, as it were, to find†a a way of painting to depict this fuzziness. For I want to keep saying to myself: "Paint nothing more than what you see!" MS 136 129b: 19.1.1948 Page 78 In Freudian analysis the dream is as it were dismantled. It loses its original sense completely. You might think of it as performed on the stage, with a plot that is sometimes fairly incomprehensible but also in part quite comprehensible, or at least apparently so, & as though this plot were then torn into little pieces & each part given a completely different meaning. You could also think of it like this: a picture is drawn on a big sheet of paper & the sheet is then folded in such a way that pieces which do not belong together at all in the original picture collide in appearance & a new picture, which may make sense or may not, is formed (this would be the manifest dream, the first picture the 'latent dream thought'). Now I could imagine that someone, who sees the unfolded picture, might exclaim "Yes, that is the solution, that is what I dreamed, but without gaps & distortions." It would then be this acknowledgement that made this solution the solution. Just as, if you are searching for a word while writing & then say: "That's it, that says what I wanted to say!"--Your acknowledgement stamps the word as having been found, i.e. the one you were looking for. (In this case it might really be said: only when you have found it, do you know what you were looking for--much as Russell said about wishing.) Page 78 What is intriguing about a dream, is not its causal connection with events in my life, etc., but rather this, that it affects us like part of a story,†b & indeed a very vivid part, the rest lying in darkness. (We would like to say†c: "Where on earth did this image come from, & what has become of it?") Yes, and if someone now shows me that this story was not the right story; that in reality quite a different one underlay it, so that I want to say†d, disenchanted, "Oh, that's how it was?", I have seemingly really been robbed of something. Certainly, the first story now disintegrates, as the paper is unfolded; the man I saw was taken from here, his words from Page Break 79 there, the surroundings in the dream from somewhere else again; but the dream story all the same has its own charm, like a painting that attracts & inspires us. 96 It can certainly be said that we contemplate the dream picture with inspiration, that we just are inspired. For if we tell the dream to someone else, the picture usually does not inspire him. The dream is like an idea pregnant with possible implications†a MS 136 137a: 22.1.1948 Page 79 Strike a coin from every mistake. MS 137 17a: 10.2.1948 Page 79 Understanding & explaining a musical phrase.--The simplest explanation is sometimes a gesture; another might be a dance step, or words describing a dance.--But isn't our understanding of the phrase an experience we have while