Could the concept of the punishments of hell be explained in some other way than by way of the concept of punishment? Or the concept of God's goodness in some other way than by way of the concept of goodness? If you want to achieve the right effect with your words, doubtless not. 110 Page 92 Suppose someone were taught: There is a being who, if you do this & that, live in such & such a way, will take you after your death to a place of eternal torment; most people end up there, a few get to a place of eternal joy.--This being has picked out in advance those who are to get to the good place; &, since only those who have lived a certain sort of life get to the place of torment, he has also picked out in advance those who are to lead that sort of life. What might be the effect of such a doctrine? Page 92 Well, there is no mention of punishment here, but rather a kind of natural law. And anyone to whom it is represented in such a light, could derive only despair or incredulity from it.†a Page Break 93 Page 93 Teaching this could not be an ethical training. And if you wanted to train anyone ethically & yet teach him like this, you would have to teach the doctrine after the ethical training, and represent it as a sort of incomprehensible mystery. MS 138 13b: 2.2.1949 Page 93 "He has chosen them, in his goodness, & you he will punish" really makes no sense. The two halves belong to different kinds of perspective. The second half is ethical & the first not. And taken together with the first the second is absurd. MS 138 14a: 2.2.1949 Page 93 It is an accident that 'last' rhymes with 'fast'.†i But a lucky accident, & you can discover†a this lucky accident. MS 138 25a: 25a: 22.2.1949 Page 93 In Beethoven's music what one might call the expression of irony is to be found for the first time. E.G. in the first movement of the Ninth. With him, moreover, it is a terrible irony, that of fate perhaps.--In Wagner irony reappears, but turned into something bourgeois. You could no doubt say that Wagner & Brahms, each in his own way, imitated 111 Beethoven; but what with him was cosmic, is†b earthly with them. The same expressions are to be found in him, but they follow different laws. Page 93 In Mozart's or Haydn's music again fate plays no sort of role. That is not the concern of this music. That ass Tovey says somewhere that this, or something similar, is connected with the fact that Mozart has no access to literature of a certain sort. As though it were established, that only books had made the music of the masters what it was. Naturally, books & music are connected. But if Mozart found no great tragedy in his reading, does that mean that he did not find it in his life? And do composers always see solely through the spectacles of poets? MS 138 28a: 27.2.1949 Page 93 Only in a quite particular musical context is there such a thing as three-part counterpoint. MS 138 28b: 27.2.1949 Page Break 94 Soulful expression in music. It is not to be described in terms of degrees of loudness & of tempo. Any more than is a soulful facial expression describable in terms of the distribution of matter in space. Indeed it is not even to be explained by means of a paradigm, since the same piece can be played with genuine expression in innumerable ways. MS 138 29a: 1.3.1949 Page 94 God's essence is said to guarantee his existence--what this really means is that here what is at issue is not the existence of something. Page 94 For could one not equally say that the essence of colour guarantees its existence? As opposed, say, to the white elephant. For it really only means: I cannot explain what 'colour' is, what the word "colour" means, without the help of a colour sample. So in this case there is no such thing as explaining 'what it would be like if colours were to exist'. Page 94 And now we might say: There can be a description of what it would be like if there were gods on Olympus--but not: 'what it would be like if there were God'. 112 And this determines the concept 'God' more precisely, Page 94 How are we taught the word "God" (its use, that is)? I cannot give an exhaustive systematic description. But I can as it were make contributions towards the description; I can say something about it & perhaps in time assemble a sort of