hearing it? & what function, in that case, has the explanation? Are we supposed to think of it while we hear the music? Are we supposed to imagine the dance, or whatever it may be, as we listen? And supposing we do,--why should that be called hearing the music with understanding?? If seeing the dance is what matters, it would be better that, rather than the music, were performed. But that is all a misunderstanding. I give someone an explanation, say to him: "It's as though..."; then he says "Yes now I understand it" or "Yes now I know how it is to be played". Above all he did not have to accept the explanation; it is not after all as though I had given him compelling reasons for comparing this passage with this & that. I did not e.g. explain to him that remarks made by the composer show that this passage is supposed to represent this & that. Page 79 If I now ask "What do I actually experience then, if I hear the theme & hear it with understanding?"--nothing but inanities†b occur to me by way of reply. Such as images, kinaesthetic sensations, thoughts†c and the like. Sure enough I say "I go along with it"--but what does that mean? It might mean roughly that I accompany the music with gestures. And if we point out that after all this happens for the most part only in very rudimentary measure, we shall perhaps receive the answer that the rudimentary movements are supplemented with images. But let us nevertheless assume that someone does accompany the music with movements in full Page Break 80 measure,--in what sense does that amount to understanding it? And do I want to say, the movements are the understanding; or his kinaesthetic sensations? (What do I know about them?)--What is true is, that, in certain circumstances, I shall 97 regard his movements as signs of his understanding. Page 80 But am I to say (if I reject images, kinaesthetic sensations, etc. as an explanation) that understanding is just a specific experience that cannot be analysed further? Well, that would be passable, as long as it is not supposed to mean,†a it is a specific experiential content. For these words make one think of distinctions like those between seeing, hearing & smelling.†b Page 80 How then do we explain to someone what it means "to understand music"? By naming the images, kinaesthetic sensations, etc. experienced by someone who understands? More likely, by pointing out the expressive movements of one who understands.--Anyway, there is also the question, what function does explanation have here? & what does it mean: to understand what it means to understand music? Some indeed would say: to understand that means: to understand music oneself. And so the question would be "Then can we teach someone to understand music", for only that kind of teaching could be called an explanation of music. Appreciation†c of music is expressed in a certain way, both in the course of hearing & playing and at other times†d too. This expression sometimes includes movements, but sometimes only the way the one who understands plays, or hums, occasionally too parallels he draws & images which, as it were, illustrate the music. Someone who understands music will listen differently (with a different facial expression, e.g.), play differently, hum differently, talk differently about the piece than someone who does not understand. His appreciation of a theme will not however be shown only in phenomena that accompany the hearing or playing of the theme, but also in an appreciation for music in general. Page 80 Appreciating music is a manifestation of human life. How could it be described to someone? Well, above all I suppose we should have to describe music. Then we could describe the relation human beings have to it. But is that all that is necessary, or is it also part of the process to teach Page Break 81 him to appreciate it for himself? Well, developing his appreciation will teach him what appreciation is in a different sense, than a teaching†a that does not do this. And again, teaching him to appreciate poetry or painting can be part of an explanation of what music is. MS 137 20b: 15.2.1948 Page 81 98 Our children learn in school already that water consists of the gases hydrogen & oxygen, or sugar of carbon, hydrogen & oxygen. Anyone who does not understand is stupid. The most important questions are concealed. MS 137 30b: 8.3.1948 Page 81 The beauty of a star-shaped figure--of a hexagonal star perhaps--is spoiled if we see it as symmetrical relative to a given axis. MS 137 34b: 10.3.1948 Page 81 Bach said that everything he achieved was the result of industry. But industry like