†f as though one saw a dream image quite clearly before one's mind's eye, but could not describe it in such a way that someone else sees it too. Page 91 †a intrigue Page 91 †b through the questions into the open, sometimes... Page 92 †a derive <only despair or incredulity> from this doctrine. Page 93 †a find Page 93 †b becomes Page 95 †a <There is> nothing unheard of in the idea Page 95 †b nothing unheard of Page 95 †c <circumstances> of this nature Page 96 †a Major & minor in Schubert Page 96 †b only a cold admiration is possible. Page 97 231 †a <an> attitude Page 97 †b particular Page 97 †c & does not know how it can be expressed. Page 98 †a response to the itch Page 98 †b continue Page 99 †a comes from the good Page 100 †a The rhythms of the German are only roughly suggested; and no attempt has been made to reproduce the rhymes in the original. Page xvi †i A noun, which in conventional German orthography would begin with an upper case "P". Page xvi †ii More conventionally "jeder so und so vielte". Page xvii †i Such messages have in the main been rendered somewhat differently in the translation. Footnotes (like this one) numbered with small Roman numerals have been added by the translator. Page 13 232 †i In German the irony is intensified by a play on the words geduldig and duldend. Page 15 †i This is something like a crossword puzzle. Each space is occupied by a separate syllable. These are joined together to form a meaningful passage by making transpositions according to the knight's move (= Rösselsprung) in chess. Page 16 †i The phrase in quotation marks is adapted from the first line of Goethe's poem, "Vanitas! Vanitatis vanitas" which in its turn is the title of the first chapter of Max Stirner's Der Einzige und sein Eigentum. Wittgenstein is here probably alluding more directly to Stirner than to Goethe, the sense of whose poem hardly fits the present context. The translator is indebted to the late Rush Rhees for drawing his attention to these allusions. Page 19 †i Literally: "which I do not know". Page 20 †i "Wissenschaft" and "wissenschaftlich" in this sentence have been translated as "science" and "scientific". However, Wittgenstein probably did not mean this in the sense of natural science (which is the most common English usage) but, according to natural German usage, was thinking of intellectual questions in a much more general way. Page 22 †i The translator is grateful for this rendering to Mr S. Ellis of the Institute of Dialect and Folk Life Studies at the University of Leeds. Page 32 †i The variant Wittgenstein wrote at this point consists of putting the clause expressing indirect speech into the subjunctive--which is grammatically correct in German but not, at least in this context, in English. One might translate the variant by rewriting the sentence: "People would live under an absolute, palpable tyranny, yet without being able to say they were not free." Page 34 †i The alternative versions "es" and "sie" have, in this context, no grammatical equivalent in English. Page 36 †i Wittgenstein's variant here consists in supplying a capital A for the noun form 233 "Anderes". There is no English counterpart for this grammatical move. Page 36 †ii Goethe, Faust, Part I (In the Study). Page 38 †i 1 Corinthians, 3. Page 39 †i Lars Hertzberg has pointed out to me that Wittgenstein misquotes here. The last line of the stanza reads: "For the Gods see everywhere." Page 42 †i New Testament Page 58 †i Wittgenstein's alternative reading "wird" for "ist" does not correspond to any meaningful distinction in English. Page 58 †ii The grammatical variant in Wittgenstein's German text has no meaningful counterpart in English. Page 59 †i I think "field" here should be understood in the sense of a "field of force", as in physics. Page 69 †i This could also be translated by the weaker "I actually do not want to be imitated". Page 70 †i See translator's note on p. 46. Page 71 †i The variant Wittgenstein gives here is simply a German version of the English phrase he originally used. Page 72