means to this end & not an end in itself. For me on the contrary clarity, transparency, is an end in itself I am not interested in erecting a building but in having the foundations of possible buildings transparently before me. So I am aiming at something different than are the scientists & my thoughts move differently than do theirs. Page 9 Each sentence that I write is trying to say the whole thing, that is, the same thing over and over again & it is as though they were†a views of one object seen from different angles. Page Break 10 I might say: if the place I want to reach could only be climbed up to by a ladder, I would give up trying to get there. For the place to which I really have to go is one that I must actually be at already. Anything that can be reached with a ladder does not interest me. Page 10 One movement orders one thought to the others in a series, the other keeps aiming at the same place. Page 10 One movement constructs & takes (in hand) one stone after another,†a the other keeps reaching for the same one. Page 10 The danger in a long foreword is that the spirit of a book has to be evident in the book itself & cannot be described. For if a book has been written for only a few 22 readers that will be clear just from the fact that only a few understand it. The book must automatically separate those who understand it & those who do not. The foreword too is written just for such as†b understand the book. Telling someone something he does not understand is pointless, even if you add that he will not be able to understand it. (That so often happens with someone you love.) If you do not want certain people to get into a room, put a lock on it for which they do not have the key. But it is senseless to talk with them about it, unless you want them all the same to admire the room from outside! The decent thing to do is: put a lock on the doors that attracts only those†c who are able to open it & is not noticed by the rest. But it's alright to say that the book in my opinion has nothing to do with the progressive civilization of Europe & America. That this civilization is perhaps an environment necessary for its spirit but that they have different aims. Everything ritualistic (everything that, as it were, smacks of the high priest) is strictly to be avoided because it straightaway turns rotten†d. Of course a kiss is a ritual too & it isn't rotten; but no more ritual is permissible than is as genuine as a kiss. Page Break 11 Page 11 It is a great temptation to want to make the spirit explicit. MS 109 204: 6-7.11.1930 Page 11 When you bump against the limits of your own decency it is as though a whirlpool of thoughts is generated, (&) an endless regress: you may say what you like, it gets you no further. MS 109 212: 8.11.1930 Page 11 I am reading Lessing (on the Bible): "Add to this the verbal clothing and the style.... absolutely full of tautologies, but of a kind to exercise one's wits by seeming sometimes to say something different while really saying the same thing, and at other times seeming to say the same thing while at bottom meaning, or 23 being capable of meaning, something different..."†5 MS 110 5:12.12.1930 Page 11 If I do not quite know how to begin a book that is because something is still unclear. For I should like to begin with the original data of philosophy, written & spoken sentences, with books as it were And here we encounter the difficulty of "Everything is in flux". And perhaps that is the very point at which to begin. MS 110 10: 13.12.1930 Page 11 If someone is merely ahead of his time, it will catch him up one day. MS 110 11: 25.12.1930 Page 11 Music, with its few notes & rhythms, seems to some people a primitive art. But only its surface†a is simple, while the body which makes possible the interpretation of this manifest content has all the infinite complexity that is suggested in the external forms of other arts & which music conceals. In a certain sense it is the most sophisticated art of all. Page 11 There are problems I never tackle, which do not lie in my path or belong to my world. Problems of the intellectual world of the West which Beethoven (& perhaps Goethe to a certain extent) tackled & wrestled with but which no philosopher has ever confronted (perhaps Nietzsche passed close to them) And perhaps they are lost to western philosophy, that is there will be no one there who experiences and so can describe the development of this culture as an epic.