in Wittgenstein's code; this is registered in the indication of source with a "c" for "code", following the page number. The code, roughly, consists in the reversal of the alphabet, in detail in the following correlations (read "a is z", "b is y", etc.): a z h s n n u f b y hh ss/ß o m v e c x i r p l w d d w k q q k x d e v l p r i/j y b f u m o s h z a &funk; ü &munk; ö t g &zunk; ä g t "Rsx", e.g., is when decoded "Ich". Page xv Completeness: In the originals many of the remarks are marked with working signs 11 and lines in the margin: these marks were not included, as their significance belongs to the context of a work process that is not present here. The same holds for (curved and pointed) brackets, bracketing a section as a whole: where the bracketed sections are edited here without preceding or following section(s) that are not bracketed, the brackets have been omitted. This is because such brackets have the function of delimiting the context and so are meaningful only where the context is also included. Also omitted are text deleted by Wittgenstein words and punctuation marks, which do not fit syntactically into the remark (this applies to crossings-out Page Break xvi in cases where Wittgenstein has neglected to cross out the whole text which belongs syntactically together with the deleted material, and to duplications of words and punctuation marks). Insertions and rearrangements were arranged or followed without this being indicated. When there was a date by a section this was included in the indication of source in standardized form. Text underlined once in the original is printed in italics; text underlined twice in the original is in SMALL CAPITALS. Passages underlined in the original with a wavy line (expressing doubts about the expression, cf. collected works, Vol. 3, p. 166) are here underlined; e.g. p. 5 "Das", p. 35 ";". Page xvi Indentation: Wittgenstein has used indentations of various lengths for the separate paragraphs of his sections. The extent of the indentation is not rendered here; it would have been meaningful to do this in a context reaching beyond section and page. The first line of a section is printed here without indentation; all following paragraphs of a section are indented. Page xvi Orthography, Grammar and Punctuation: Wittgenstein's orthographic habits especially in the use of upper and lower case (e.g. "pointen"†i), in separations and runnings-together of words (e.g. "jeder so & sovielte"†ii) and historically or regionally restricted orthographies (like "c" for "z" and "k" in words of Latin origin, "stätig" for "stetig" and "alchemistisch" for "alchimistisch") have been respected. The ampersand "&" for "und" or "and" is retained. The use of "ss"/"ß" and of the apostrophe in genitives ("Goethe's") has been consistently corrected in accordance with modern usage. Extra punctuation marks have been supplied only where their absence would make reading difficult; and brackets were completed where in the original brackets are opened, but not closed. Quotation marks are printed in standardized form, ",", ','. Otherwise the punctuation has been left as in the original. All expansions at the level of words (i.e. expansions which constitute a new word) and at the level of punctuation are shown with pointed brackets, e.g. p. 7 "<)>"; (orthographic) expansions and omissions below the level of words are not indicated. Indication is also made where an abbreviation has been expanded 12 into the full word, as in the case of "B" into "B<unyan>". Page xvi Variants: The remarks are printed inclusive of (undeleted) variants. Except Page Break xvii in cases like "(...) während die eigentlich(e) philosophische Überlegung (...)" (alternatives of "eigentliche" and "eigentlich": both versions in the main text, p. 53), the version written first is given in the main text, the other(s) however in footnotes. The various ways of marking variants ("[(...)]", "//(...)//" etc.) are not printed. Variants within variants are separated by "|". When variants required repetition of what was written only once in the original, this is indicated by "<(...)>". Alternative punctuation is also counted as a variant. Page xvii Graphics: The musical notation on p. 19 and the figures on pages 44 and 60 are