Page 21 Spengler could be better understood if he said: I am comparing different periods of culture with the lives of families; within the family there is a family resemblance, while you will also find a resemblance between members of different families; family resemblance differs from the other sort of resemblance in such & such ways etc.. What I mean is: We have to be told the object of comparison, the object from which this approach is derived, so that prejudices do not constantly slip into the discussion. Because then we shall willy nilly ascribe what is true†b of the prototype of the approach†c to the object to which we are applying the approach as well; & we claim "it must always be..." This comes about because we want to give the prototype's characteristics a foothold in the approach. But since we confuse prototype & object we find ourselves dogmatically conferring on the object properties which only the prototype necessarily possesses. On the other hand we think the approach will lack the†d generality we want to give it if it really holds only of the one case. But the prototype must just be presented for what it is; as characterizing the whole approach and determining its form. In this way it stands at the head & is generally valid by virtue of determining the form of approach, not by virtue of a claim that everything which is true only of it Page Break 22 holds for all the objects to which the approach is applied. One should thus always ask when exaggerated dogmatic claims are made: What is actually true in this. Or again: In what case is that actually true MS 111 119: 19.8.1931 Page 22 From Simplicissimus: riddles of technology. (Picture: two professors in front of a bridge under construction) Voice from above: "Fotch it dahn--coom on--fotch it dahn A tell tha--we'll turn it t'other rooad sooin!"†i --"It really is quite incomprehensible, my dear colleague, how such complicated & precise work can be carried out in this language." MS 111 132: 36 23.8.1931 Page 22 We keep hearing the remark that philosophy really does not progress, that we are still occupied with the same philosophical problems as were the Greeks. Those who say this however don't understand why it is so.†a It is because our language has remained the same & keeps seducing us into asking the same questions. As long as there is still a verb 'to be' that looks as though it functions in the same way as 'to eat' and 'to drink', as long as we still have the adjectives 'identical', 'true', 'false', 'possible', as long as we continue to talk of a river of time & an expanse of space, etc., etc., people will keep stumbling over the same cryptic difficulties & staring at something that no explanation seems capable of clearing up. And this satisfies besides a longing for the supernatural†b for in so far as people think they can see the "limit of human understanding", they believe of course that they can see beyond it. Page 22 I read: "philosophers are no nearer to the meaning of 'Reality' than Plato got;..." What a singular†c situation. How singular then that Plato has been able to get†d even as far as he did! Or that we could get no further afterwards! Was it because Plato was so clever? MS 111 133: 24.8.1931 Page Break 23 Kleist wrote somewhere†14 that what the poet would most of all like to be able to do, would be to convey thoughts in themselves†a without words. (What a strange avowal.) MS 111 173: 13.9.1931 Page 23 It is often said that a new religion brands the gods of the old one as devils. But in reality they have presumably by that time already become devils. MS 111 180:13.9.1931 Page 23 The works of the great masters are stars†b which rise and set around us. So the time will come again for every great work that is now in the descendent. MS 111 194: 13.9.1931 Page 23 (Mendelssohn's music, when it is flawless, consists of musical arabesques. That is 37 why we feel embarrassed at every lack of rigour in his work.) Page 23 In Western Civilization the Jew is always being measured according to calibrations which do not fit him. That the Greek thinkers were neither philosophers in the western sense, nor scientists in the western sense, that those who took part in the Olympic Games were not sportsmen & fit into <no> western occupation, is clear to many people. But it is the same with the Jews too†c