among the philosophical texts. Some of these notes are autobiographical, some are about the nature of philosophical activity, and some concern subjects of a general sort, such as questions about art or about religion. It is not always possible to separate them sharply from the philosophical text; in many cases, however, Wittgenstein himself hinted at such a separation--by the use of brackets or in other ways. Page ix Some of these notes are ephemeral; others on the other hand--the majority--are of great interest. Sometimes they are strikingly beautiful or profound. It was evident to the literary executors that a number of these notes would have to be published. G.H. von Wright was commissioned to make a selection and arrange it. Page ix It was a decidedly difficult task; at various times I had different ideas about how best to accomplish it. To begin with, for example, I imagined that the remarks could be arranged according to the topics of which they treated--such as "music", "architecture", "Shakespeare", "aphorisms of practical wisdom", "philosophy", and the like. Sometimes the remarks can be arranged into such groupings without strain, but by and large, splitting up the material in this way would probably give an impression of artificiality. At one time moreover I had thought of including already published material. For many of Wittgenstein's most impressive "aphorisms" are to be found in his philosophical works--in the Notebooks from the First World War, in the Tractatus, and in the Investigations too. I should like to say that it is when they are embedded in such contexts that Wittgenstein's remarks really have their most powerful effect. But for that very reason it did not seem to me right to tear them from their surroundings. Page Break x Page x At one time too I played with the idea of not making a very extensive selection, but including only the "best" remarks. The impression made by the good remarks would, I thought, only be weakened by a great mass of material. That, presumably, is true--but it was not my job to be an arbiter of taste. Furthermore, I did not trust 7 myself to choose between repeated formulations of the same, or nearly the same, thought. Often the repetitions themselves seemed to me to have a substantial point. Page x In the end I decided on the only principle of selection that seemed to me unconditionally right. I excluded from the collection notes of a purely "personal" sort--i.e. notes in which Wittgenstein is commenting on the external circumstances of his life, his state of mind and relations with other people--some of whom are still living. Generally speaking these notes were easy to separate from the rest and they are on a different level of interest from those which are printed here. Only in a few cases where these two conditions seemed not to be met did I include notes of an autobiographical nature as well. Page x The remarks are published here in chronological order with an indication of their year of origin. It is conspicuous that nearly half the remarks stem from the period after the completion (in 1945) of Part One of Philosophical Investigations. Page x In the absence of further explanation some of the remarks will be obscure or enigmatic to a reader who is not familiar with the circumstances of Wittgenstein's life or with what he was reading. In many cases it would have been possible to provide explanatory comments in footnotes. I have nevertheless, with very few exceptions, refrained from adding comments. I ought to add that all the footnotes are the editor's.†1 Page x It is unavoidable that a book of this sort will reach the hands of readers to whom otherwise Wittgenstein's philosophical work is, and will remain, unknown. This need not necessarily be harmful or useless. I am all the same convinced that these notes can be properly understood and appreciated only against the background of Wittgenstein's philosophy and, furthermore, that they make a contribution to our understanding of that philosophy. Page x I began making my selection from the manuscripts in the years 1965-6. I then laid the work aside until 1974. Mr Heikki Nyman helped me with the final selection and arrangement of the collection. He also checked that the next agreed exactly with the manuscripts and removed many errors and 8 Page Break xi gaps from my typescript. I am very grateful to him for his work, which he carried out with great care and good taste. Without his help I should probably not have been able to bring myself to complete the collection for the press. I am also deeply indebted to Mr Rush Rhees for making corrections in the text which I produced and for giving me valuable advice on matters of selection. Helsinki, January 1977 Georg Henrik von Wright Page Break xii Page xii The present new version of the text of Vermischte Bemerkungen is the work of Alois Pichler. Mr Pichler, who works at the Wittgenstein Archive of the