Wisdom is something cold, & to that extent foolish. (Faith, on the other hand, a passion.) We might also say: wisdom merely conceals life from you. (Wisdom is like cold, grey ash covering the glowing embers.) MS 134 9: 3.3.1947 81 Page 64 Don't for heaven's sake, be afraid of talking nonsense! Only don't fail to pay attention to your nonsense. MS 134 20: 5.3.1947 Page 64 The miracles of nature, We might say: art discloses the miracles of nature to us. It is based on the concept of the miracles of nature. (The blossom, just opening out. What is marvellous about it?) We say: "Look, how it's opening out!" Page 64 It could only be by accident that someone's dreams about the future of Page Break 65 philosophy, art, science would come true. What he sees is a continuation of his own world in his dream, that is to say PERHAPS his wish (and perhaps not) but not reality. It might still happen that a person's photograph, e.g., changed with time, almost as if he were aging on it. But its changes then take place according to their own laws & why should they lead in a parallel direction to the development of the real person? Page 65 The mathematician too can of course marvel at the miracles (the crystal) of nature; but can he do it, once a problem has arisen about what he sees?†a Is it really possible as long as the object he finds awe-inspiring or gazes at with awe is shrouded in a philosophical fog? I could imagine someone admiring trees, & also the shadows, or reflections of trees, which he mistakes for trees. But if he should once tell himself that these†b are not after all trees & if it becomes a problem for him what they are, or what relation they have to trees, then his admiration will have suffered a rupture, that will now need healing. MS 134 27: 10.-15.3.1947* Page 65 Sometimes a sentence can be understood only if it is read at the right tempo. My sentences are all to be read slowly. MS 134 76: 28.3.1947 82 Page 65 The 'necessity' with which the second idea succeeds the first. (Overture to Figaro.) Nothing could be more idiotic than to say it's 'pleasing' to hear the second after the first!--But the paradigm according to which everything there is right is certainly obscure. 'It is the natural development.' You gesture with your hand, would like to say: "of course!"--You could too compare the transition to a transition (the entry of a new character) in a story, e.g., or a poem. That is how this piece fits into the world of our thoughts & feelings. MS 134 78: 30.3.1947 Page 65 The folds of my heart all the time tend to stick together & to open it I should need to keep tearing them apart. MS 134 80 30.3.1947 Page 65 A foolish & naïve American film can in all its foolishness & by means of it be instructive. A fatuous, non-naïve†c English film can teach nothing. I have Page Break 66 often drawn a lesson from a foolish American film. MS 134 89: 2.4.1947 Page 66 Is what I am doing in any way worth the effort? Well only, if it receives a light from above. And if that happens,--why should I take care, not to be robbed of the fruits of my labour? If what I write really has value, how were anyone to steal the value from me? If the light from above is lacking, then I can in any case be no more than clever. MS 134 95: 3.4.1947 Page 66 I completely understand, how someone may hate it, if the priority of his invention or discovery is called in question, how†a he may be willing to defend†b this priority with tooth & claw. And yet it is only a chimera. To be sure it seems to me too cheap, all too easy for Claudius to scoff at the priority disputes between Newton & Leibniz; but I think it is true all the same that this quarrel springs only from vile weaknesses & is nourished by VILE people. What would Newton have lost if he had acknowledged Leibniz's originality? Absolutely nothing! He would have gained a lot. And yet, how hard is such an acknowledgement, seeming,†c to someone who attempts it, like a confession of his own incapacity. Only people