Taste can delight, but not seize. MS 134 129: 9.4.1947 Page 68 You can as it were restore an old style in a new†e language; perform it afresh so to speak in a manner†f that†g suits our times. In doing so you really only reproduce. I have done this in my building work. Page Break 69 Page 69 What I mean is not however giving an old style a new trim. You don't take the old forms & fix them up to suit today's taste. No, you are really†a speaking, maybe unconsciously, the old language, but speaking it in a manner that belongs to the newer world, though not on that account necessarily one that is to its taste. MS 134 133: 10.4.1947 Page 69 Someone reacts like this: he says "Not that!"--& resists it. Out of this situations perhaps develop which are equally intolerable; & perhaps by then strength for any further revolt is exhausted. We say "If he hadn't done that, the evil would not have come about." But with what justification? Who knows the laws according to which society unfolds? I am sure even the cleverest has no idea. If you fight, you fight. If you hope, you hope. Someone can fight, hope & even believe, without believing scientifically. Page 69 Science: enrichment & impoverishment. The one method elbows all others aside. Compared with this they all seem paltry, preliminary stages at best. You must climb down to the sources to see them all side by side, the disregarded & the preferred. MS 134 141: 13.4.1947 86 Page 69 Is it just I who cannot found a school, or can a philosopher never do so? I cannot found a school, because I actually want not to be imitated.†i In any case not by those who publish articles in philosophical journals. Page 69 The use of the word "fate". Our attitude to the future & the past. To what extent do we hold ourselves responsible for the future? How much do we speculate about the future? How do we think about past & future? If something unwelcome happens:--do we ask "Who's to blame?", do we say "Someone must be to blame for it"?,--or do we say "It was God's will", "It was fate"? In the way in which asking a question, insisting on an answer, or not asking it, expresses a different attitude, a different way of living, so too, in this sense, an utterance like "It is God's will" or "We are not masters of our fate". What this sentence does, or at least something similar, a commandment Page Break 70 too could do. Including one that you give to yourself. And conversely a commandment, e.g. "Do not grumble!" can be uttered like the affirmation of a truth. Now why am I so anxious to keep apart these ways of using "declarative sentences"? Is it really necessary? Did people in former times really not properly understand what they wanted to do with a sentence? Is it pedantry?--It is simply an attempt to see that every usage gets its due. Perhaps then a reaction against the overestimation of science. The use of the word "science"†i for "everything that can be said without nonsense" already betrays this over-estimation. For this amounts in reality to dividing utterances into two classes: good & bad; & the danger is already there. It is similar to dividing all animals, plants & rocks into the useful & the harmful. But of course the words "see that they get their due" & "overestimation" express my point of view. I could have said instead: "I want to help this & this to regain respect."; only I don't see it like that. Page 70 Fate is the antithesis of natural law. A natural law is something you try to fathom, & make use of, fate is not. Page 70 87 It is not by any means clear to me, that I wish for a continuation of my work by others, more than a change in the way we live, making all these questions superfluous. (For this reason I could never found a school.) Page 70 The philosopher says "Look at things like this!"--but first, that is not to say that people will look at things like this, second, he may be altogether too late with his admonition, & it's possible too that such an admonition can achieve absolutely nothing & that the impulse towards such a change in the way things are perceived must come from another direction. For instance it is quite unclear whether Bacon started anything moving, except the surface of his readers' minds. Page 70 Nothing seems to me more unlikely than that a scientist or mathematician, who