this is particularly hard because he, as it were, has nothing. It is much harder to be poor voluntarily if you can't help being poor, than when you might also be rich. Page 16 It might be said (rightly or wrongly) that the Jewish mind is not in a Page Break 17 position to produce even so much as a tiny blade of grass or flower but that its way is to make a drawing of the blade of grass or the flower that has grown in the mind of another & then use it to sketch a comprehensive picture. This is not to allege a vice & everything is all right as long as what is being done is quite clear. Danger arises only when someone confuses the nature of a Jewish work with that of a non-Jewish work & especially when the author of the former does so himself, as he so easily may. ("Doesn't he look as proud as though he were being milked himself."†9<)> It is typical of the Jewish mind to understand someone else's work better than he understands it himself. Page 17 When I have had a picture suitably framed or have hung it in the right surroundings I have often caught myself being as proud as though I had painted the picture. Actually that's not right: not "as proud as though I had painted it" but as proud as though I had helped to paint it, as though I had so to speak painted a little bit of it. It is as if an exceptional arranger of grasses were at last to think that he too had produced at least a quite tiny blade of grass himself. Whereas it ought to be clear to him that his work lies in a different region altogether. The process through which even the tiniest & meanest blade of grass comes into being is quite foreign & unknown to him. 30 Page 17 A picture of a complete apple tree, however accurate, in a certain sense resembles it infinitely less than does the smallest daisy. And in this sense a symphony by Bruckner is infinitely more closely related to a symphony from the heroic period than is one by Mahler. If the latter is a work of art it is one of a totally different sort. (But this observation itself is actually Spenglerian.) Page 17 Anyway when I was in Norway during the year 1913-14 I had some thoughts of my own, or so at least it seems to me now. I mean that I have the impression of having given birth to new lines of thinking at that time (But perhaps I am mistaken). Whereas now I seem just to apply old ones. MS 154 15v: 1931 Page 17 There is something Jewish in Rousseau's character. MS 154 20v: 1931 Page 17 If it is said on occasion that (someone's) philosophy is a matter of temperament, there is some truth in this. A preference for certain comparisons is something we call a matter of temperament & far more disagreements Page Break 18 rest on this than appears at first sight.†a Page 18 "Look on this wart†b as a regular limb of your body!" Can one do that, to order? Do I have the power to decide at will to have, or not to have, a certain ideal conception of my body? Within the history of the peoples of Europe the history of the Jews is†10 not treated so circumstantially as their intervention in European affairs would actually merit, because within this history they are experienced as a sort of disease, anomaly, & nobody wants to put a disease on the same level as normal life†c [[sic . ?]] We may say: this bump can be regarded as a limb of one's body only if our whole feeling for the body changes (if the whole national feeling for the body changes). Otherwise the best we can do is put up with it. You may expect an individual to display this sort of tolerance or even to disregard such things; but you cannot expect this of a nation since it is only a nation by 31 virtue of not disregarding such things. I.e. there is a contradiction in expecting someone to retain the original aesthetic feeling for his body & also to make the swelling welcome. Page 18 Power & possession are not the same thing. Even though possession also gives us power. If Jews are said not to have any sense for possession that is presumably compatible with their liking to be rich; for money is for them a particular sort of power not possession. (I should for instance not like my people to be poor, since I wish them to have a certain power. Naturally I wish them to use this power properly too.) Page 18 There is definitely a certain kinship between Brahms & Mendelssohn; but I do not mean that shown by the individual passages in Brahms's works that are reminiscent of passages in Mendelssohn but the kinship of which I am speaking could be expressed by saying that Brahms does with complete rigour what