capable of getting out the big, important thing. But there are great prospects hidden in these feeble remarks. MS 136 62a: 4.1.1948 Page 75 Schiller writes in a letter (to Goethe, I think)†47 of a 'poetic mood'. I think I know what he means, I think I am familiar with it myself. It is the mood of receptivity to nature & one in which one's thoughts seem as vivid as nature itself. But it is strange that Schiller did not produce anything better (or so it seems to me) & so I am furthermore not entirely convinced that what I produce in such a mood is worth anything. It is quite possible that what gives my thoughts their lustre on such occasions is a light that they receive from behind them. That they do not themselves glow. Page 75 Where others go on ahead, I remain standing. MS 136 80a: 8.1.1948 Page 75 [For the Foreword.]†48 It is not without†a reluctance that I offer the book to the public. The hands into which it will fall are for the most part not those in which I like to imagine it. May it soon--this is what I wish for it--be completely forgotten by the philosophical journalists & thus perhaps be kept for a more upright†b kind of reader. MS 136 81a: 8.1.1948 Page Break 76 Only every so often does one of the sentences I am writing here make a step forward; the rest are like the snipping of the barber's scissors, which he has to keep in motion so as to be able to make a cut with them at the right moment. MS 136 81b: 8.1.1948 Page 76 As I again & again come across questions in more remote regions that I cannot answer, it becomes clear†a why I still cannot find my way round regions that are less remote. For how do I know that what stands in the way of an answer here is 93 not precisely what prevents me from clearing away the fog over there? MS 136 89a: 10.1.1948 Page 76 Raisins may be the best part of a cake; but a bag of raisins is not better than a cake; & someone who is in a position to give us a bag full of raisins still cannot bake a cake with them, let alone do something better. I am thinking of Kraus & his aphorisms, but of myself too & my philosophical remarks. A cake is not as it were: thinned out raisins. MS 136 91b: 11.1.1948 Page 76 Colours are a stimulus to philosophizing. Perhaps that explains Goethe's passion for the theory of colours. Colours seem to present us with a riddle, a riddle that stimulates us,--not one that exasperates†i us. MS 136 92b: 11.1.1948 Page 76 Human beings can regard all the evil within them as blindness. MS 136 107a: 14.1.1948 Page 76 If it is true, as I believe, that Mahler's music is worthless, the question is what I think he should have done with his talent. For quite obviously it took a string of very rare talents to produce this bad music. Should he, say, have written his symphonies & burnt them? Or should he have done himself violence & not have written them? Should he have written them & realized that they were worthless? But how could he have realized that? I see it because I can compare his music with that of the great composers. But he could not do that; for someone to whom that has occurred may perhaps have misgivings about the value of his production, because he no doubt sees that he does not, so to speak, have the nature of the other great Page Break 77 composers,--but that does not mean that he will grasp the worthlessness; because he can always tell himself that he is, it is true, different from the rest (whom however he admires) but excellent in another way. We could perhaps say: If nobody whom you admire is like you, then presumably you believe in your own 94 value only because you are you.--Even someone who struggles against vanity, but not entirely successfully, will always deceive himself about the value of what he produces. But what seems most dangerous is to put your work into the position of being compared, first by yourself & then by others, with the great works of former times. You should not entertain such a comparison at all. For if today's circumstances are really so different, from what they once were, that you cannot compare your work with earlier works in respect of its genre, then you equally cannot compare its value with that of the other work. I myself am constantly