facsimiles (reduced). In the original they are on lined paper; here the lines are suppressed for the sake of greater clarity. The facsimiles were produced by Michael Biggs. Page xvii Notes: Comments, explanations and textual notes are in end notes. "Unklar" means that the passage's content is unclear; "Nicht klar leserlich" means that the passage is not clearly legible.†i Page xvii Appendix: The Appendix contains three lists: the first lists the sources of the remarks in the order in which they are published here; the second lists the sources alphanumerically; the third lists the beginnings of the remarks (with page references). The remarks which, in contrast to earlier editions, have been edited as whole sections are marked in the lists with an asterisk *. Alois Pichler Page Break xviii 13 Page xviii The present translation is a quite extensive revision of my original translation published in 1980. This is of course partly to take account of the new material included in Alois Pichler's revised edition, but there are other changes too. Some of these changes relate to my dissatisfaction with my earlier renderings; but there are others which are consequent on the somewhat different character of Mr Pichler's edition as compared with earlier editions. Page xviii Professor von Wright's earlier editions were intended for a readership broader than that to be expected for Wittgenstein's more technically philosophical works. They did not, partly for that reason, attempt to include the kind of textual detail that Mr Pichler has aimed at. One important feature of the newly included material is the detailed noting of the many variant readings that Wittgenstein included in his manuscripts and typescripts. In order even to begin any attempt to translate these variants, it was necessary to stick much more closely to the original grammatical structure of Wittgenstein's texts than I had thought appropriate in my earlier version. I have done this while still trying as far as possible to produce a text that reads like English and not a word for word representation into a weird "translatese". Page xviii Sometimes Wittgenstein's variant readings can be captured more or less satisfactorily; but by no means always. This is because the relative values of words which are roughly synonymous in German are not mirrored in the English counterparts of these words. In these cases there is no reason to suppose that Wittgenstein would have wished to present anything like the same variant readings had he been writing in English. It is important for the reader to bear this in mind. Page xviii I have added some footnotes of my own. These are numbered in small Roman numerals thus: i, ii, etc. Page Break xix Page xix I wish to reiterate my gratitude to the people who gave me generous help with the earlier translation: Marina Barabas, Steven Burns, S. Ellis, Stephan Körner, Norman Malcolm, Heiki Nyman, Rush Rhees, Helen Widdess, Erika Winch and G. H. von Wright. I now wish to add my thanks to two people who have helped me with my revised version: Helen Geyer and Lars Hertzberg. Lars Hertzberg in particular took enormous pains to go through the first draft of my revision. He 14 made valuable suggestions, some of which I followed; though in other cases I obstinately stuck to my original versions. University of Illinois at Urbana/Champaign Peter Winch November 1995 Page Break 1 Page Break 2 Page 2 Page Break 3 Page 3 The Lieutenant†1 & I have already talked about all kinds of thing; a very nice man. He is able to get along with the greatest scoundrels & be friendly without compromising himself. If we hear a Chinese we tend to take his speech for inarticulate gurgling. Someone who understands Chinese will recognize language in what he hears. Similarly I often cannot recognize the human being in someone etc. Worked a bit, but without success. MS 101 7 c: 21.8.1914* Page 3 There is no religious denomination in which so much sin has been committed through the misuse of metaphorical expressions as in mathematics. MS 106 58: 1929 Page 3 The human gaze has the power of making things precious; though it's true that they become more costly too. MS 106 247: 1929 Page 3 I myself still find my way of philosophizing new, & it keeps striking me so afresh, & that is why I have to repeat myself so often. It will have become part of the flesh & blood of a new generation & it will find the repetitions boring. For me they are necessary.--This method consists essentially in leaving the question of truth and asking about sense instead. MS 105 46 c: 1929* Page 3 15