a face with a feeling†b for its expression? Drinking in the expression on the face? Page 58 Think of the demeanour of someone who draws the face with understanding for its expression. Think of the sketcher's face his movements;--what shows that every stroke he makes is†i dictated by the face, that nothing in his sketch is arbitrary, that he is a delicate instrument? Is that really an experience? I mean: can we say that this expresses an experience? Page 58 Once again: what does it consist in, following a musical phrase with understanding, or, playing it with understanding? Don't look inside yourself. Ask yourself rather, what makes you say that's what someone else is doing. And what prompts you to say he has a particular experience? Indeed, do we ever actually say that? Wouldn't I be more likely to say of someone else that he's having a whole host of experiences†ii? I would perhaps say: "He is experiencing the theme intensely"; but ask yourself, what the expression of this†c is?†d†e Page Break 59 Then again you might think intensive experiencing of the theme 'consists' in the sensations of the movements etc. with which we accompany it. And that seems (again) like a soothing explanation. But have you any reason to think it true? I mean, e.g., a recollection of this experience? Is not this theory again merely a picture? No, this is not how things are: the theory is no more than an attempt to link up the expressive movements with an 'experience'. Page 59 75 If you ask: how I experienced the theme, I shall perhaps say "As a question" or something of the sort, or I shall whistle it with expression etc. MS 132 51: 22.9.1946 Page 59 "He is experiencing the theme intensely. Something is happening in him when†a he hears it." Well, what? Page 59 Does the theme point to nothing beyond itself? Oh yes! But that means:--The impression it makes on me is connected with things in its surroundings--e.g. with the existence of the German language & of its intonation, but that means with the whole field†i of our language games.†37 If I say e.g.: it's as if here a conclusion were being drawn, or, as if here something were being confirmed, or, as if this were a reply to what came earlier,--then the way I understand it clearly presupposes familiarity with conclusions, confirmations, replies, etc. Page 59 A theme, no less than a face, wears an expression. Page 59 "The repeat is necessary" In what respect is it necessary? Well, sing it, then you will see that it is only the repeat that gives it its tremendous power.--Don't we feel then as though a model for this theme must in this case exist in reality, & as though the theme only approached it, corresponded to it, once this part were repeated Or am I to utter the inanity: 'It just sounds more beautiful with the repeat'? (You see there by the way what an inane role the word "beautiful" plays in aesthetics) And yet there just is no paradigm there other than the theme. And yet again there is a paradigm other than the theme: namely the rhythm of our language, of our thinking & feeling. And furthermore the theme is a new part of our language, it becomes incorporated in it; we learn a new gesture. Page Break 60 Page 60 The theme interacts with language. Page 60 76 It is one thing to sow in thought, another to reap in thought. Page 60 The last two bars of the "Death & the Maiden" theme, the  ; you may think first that this figure is conventional, ordinary, until you understand its deeper expression. I.e. until you understand that here the ordinary is filled with significance. MS 132 59: 25.9.1946 Page 60 "Fare well!" "A whole world of pain lies in these words" How can it live†a in them?--It is bound up with them. The words are like the acorn from which an oak tree can grow. But where is the law laid down, according to which the tree grows out of the acorn? Well, the picture is incorporated into our thinking as a result of experience.†b MS 132 62: 25.9.1946* Page 60 Esperanto. Our feeling of disgust, when we utter an invented word with invented derivative syllables. The word is cold, has no associations & yet plays at 'language'. A system of purely written signs would not disgust us like this. MS 132 69: 26.9.1946 Page 60 You could attach prices to ideas. Some cost a lot some little. [Broad's ideas all cost