the kind of use that the word “this” has is not among them. It is quite true that in giving an ostensive deﬁnition, for instance, we often point to the object named and utter the name. And likewise, in giving an ostensive deﬁnition, we utter the word “this” while pointing to a thing. And also, the word “this” and a name often occupy the same position in the context of a sentence. But it is precisely characteristic of a name that it is explained by means of the demonstrative expres- sion “That is N” (or “That is called ‘N’”). But do we also explain “That is called ‘this’”, or “This is called ‘this’”? This is connected with the conception of naming as a process that is, so to speak, occult. Naming seems to be a strange connection of a word with an object. a And such a strange connection really obtains, particularly when a philosopher tries to fathom the relation between name and what is named by staring at an object in front of him and repeating a name, or even the word “this”, innumerable times. For philo- sophical problems arise when language goes on holiday. And then we may indeed imagine naming to be some remarkable mental act, as it were the baptism of an object. And we can also say the word “this” to the object, as it were address the object as “this” a a strange use of this word, which perhaps occurs only when philosophizing. 39. But why does it occur to one to want to make precisely this word into a name, when it obviously is not a name? a That is just the rea- son. For one is tempted to make an objection against what is ordinar- ily called a name. It can be put like this: a name ought really to signify a simple. And one might perhaps give the following reasons for this: the word “Nothung”, say, is a proper name in the ordinary sense. The sword Nothung consists of parts combined in a particular way. If they are combined differently, Nothung does not exist. But it is clear that the sentence “Nothung has a sharp blade” has a sense, whether Nothung is still whole or has already been shattered. But if “Nothung” is the name of an object, this object no longer exists when Nothung is shattered into pieces; and as no object would then correspond to the name, it would have no meaning. But then the sentence “Nothung has a sharp blade” would contain a word that had no meaning, and hence * 24 Philosophische Untersuchungen Nun hat er aber Sinn; also muß den Wörtern, aus denen er besteht, immer etwas entsprechen. Also muß das Wort “Nothung” bei der Analyse des Sinnes verschwinden und statt seiner müssen Wörter ein- treten, die Einfaches benennen. Diese Wörter werden wir billigerweise die eigentlichen Namen nennen. 40. Laß uns zuerst über den Punkt dieses Gedankengangs reden:  daß das Wort keine Bedeutung hat, wenn ihm nichts entspricht. a Es ist wichtig, festzustellen, daß das Wort “Bedeutung” sprachwidrig gebraucht wird, wenn man damit das Ding bezeichnet, das dem Wort ‘entspricht’. Dies heißt, die Bedeutung eines Namens verwechseln mit dem Träger des Namens. Wenn Herr N. N. stirbt, so sagt man, es sterbe der Träger des Namens, nicht, es sterbe die Bedeutung des Namens. Und es wäre unsinnig, so zu reden, denn hörte der Name auf, Bedeutung zu haben, so hätte es keinen Sinn, zu sagen “Herr N. N. ist gestorben”. 41. Im §15 haben wir in die Sprache (8) Eigennamen eingeführt. Nimm nun an, das Werkzeug mit dem Namen “N” sei zerbrochen. A weiß  es nicht und gibt dem B das Zeichen “N”. Hat dieses Zeichen nun Bedeutung, oder hat es keine? a Was soll B tun, wenn er dieses Zeichen erhält? a Wir haben darüber nichts vereinbart. Man könnte fragen: was wird er tun? Nun, er wird vielleicht ratlos dastehen, oder A die Stücke zeigen. Man könnte hier sagen: “N” sei bedeutungslos geworden; und dieser Ausdruck würde besagen, daß für das Zeichen “N” in unserm Sprachspiel nun keine Verwendung mehr ist (es sei denn, wir gäben ihm