there, when I look out for a content? —– But it could only show this from case to case. And even so, it cannot show me what the word “remember” means, and hence where to look for a content! I get the idea of a memory content only through comparing psycho- logical concepts. It is like comparing two games. (Soccer has goals,  volleyball doesn’t.) 370. Would this situation be conceivable: for the ﬁrst time in his life someone remembers something and says: “Yes, now I know what ‘remembering’ is, what it feels like to remember”. a How does he know that this feeling is ‘remembering’? Compare: “Yes, now I know what ‘tingling’ is” (he has perhaps had an electric shock for the ﬁrst time). —– Does he know that it is memory because it is caused by something past? And how does he know what the past is? After all, a person learns the concept of the past by remembering. And how will he know again in the future what remembering feels like? (On the other hand, one might, perhaps, speak of a feeling “Long, long ago”, for there is a tone, a gesture, which go with certain tales of past times.) |232| xiv 371. Die Verwirrung und Öde der Psychologie ist nicht damit zu er- klären, daß sie eine “junge Wissenschaft” sei; ihr Zustand ist mit dem der Physik z. B. in ihrer Frühzeit nicht zu vergleichen. (Eher noch mit dem gewisser Zweige der Mathematik. Mengenlehre.) Es bestehen nämlich, in der Psychologie, experimentelle Methoden und Begriffsver- wirrung. (Wie im andern Fall Begriffsverwirrung und Beweismethoden.) Das Bestehen der experimentellen Methode läßt uns glauben, wir hät- ten das Mittel, die Probleme, die uns beunruhigen, loszuwerden; ob- gleich Problem und Methode windschief aneinander vorbei laufen. 372. Es ist für die Mathematik eine Untersuchung möglich ganz ana- log unsrer Untersuchung der Psychologie. Sie ist ebensowenig eine mathematische, wie die andere eine psychologische. In ihr wird nicht gerechnet, sie ist also, z. B., nicht Logistik. Sie könnte den Namen einer Untersuchung der ‘Grundlagen der Mathematik’ verdienen. xiv 371. The confusion and barrenness of psychology is not to be ex- plained by its being a “young science”; its state is not comparable with that of physics, for instance, in its beginnings. (Rather, with that of  certain branches of mathematics. Set theory.) For in psychology, there are experimental methods and conceptual confusion. (As in the other case, conceptual confusion and methods of proof.) The existence of the experimental method makes us think that we have the means of getting rid of the problems which trouble us; but problem and method pass one another by. 372. An investigation entirely analogous to our investigation of psychology is possible also for mathematics. It is just as little a mathematical inves- tigation as ours is a psychological one. It will not contain calculations, so it is not, for example, formal logic. It might deserve the name of an investigation of the ‘foundations of mathematics’. Endnotes Philosophical Investigations §1(a) n. 1 We have translated from Wittgenstein’s German, not from Augustine’s Latin text. §1(d) ‘Von einer solchen war hier gar nicht die Rede’: Anscombe’s very free translation can be justiﬁed in the light of Wittgenstein’s modiﬁca- tions of Rhees’s translation (TS 226). He changed the original transla- tion ‘There was no question of any here; only . . .’ to read: ‘There was no question of such an entity “meaning” here, only . . .’ thus making it clear what conception of meaning is under attack here. This is an authorial modiﬁcation rather than a translation of the text, but its spirit is captured by Anscombe’s rendering. §11(b) ‘hear them in speech, or see them written or in print’: this trans- lation is based on Wittgenstein’s corrections to TS 226. §16(c) Double-bracketed sentences are notes for the author to insert or consider inserting speciﬁc remarks from his notebooks or a new obser- vation. Here, the double-bracketed note may be a reference to MS 124, 60 (cp. Lectures on the Foundations of Mathematics (Harvester Press,