Wittgenstein here is focusing on linguistic signs (as is evident from the subsequent paragraph (‘And we rack our brains over the nature of the real sign’) a so we have opted for ‘sentence’ here. Again, in §§395– 6, it is clearly the sentence, not the proposition, that is supposedly guar- anteed its sense by the imagination. And in §554, Wittgenstein is talk- ing about applying the operation of negation to sentences. Similar recurrent difﬁculties arise with the translation of Seele, since it cannot always be correctly rendered by ‘soul’. Anscombe was clearly aware of the problem, and in many remarks rightly opted for ‘mind’ as a correct translation of Seele (e.g. §§6, 37, 188, 196, 357, 358, 648, 651, 652), and usually translated Zustand der Seele correctly as ‘state of mind’. However, in some remarks she questionably opted for ‘soul’. For example, in §283(d): ‘And can one say of the stone that it has a Seele and that is what has the pain? What has a Seele, or pain, to do with a stone?’ a what is at issue is mind, not soul, and the problems of mind and body, not of the soul and the body. Similarly, in the ﬁnal Editorial Preface to the Fourth Edition xv paragraph of this remark: ‘For one has to say it of a body, or, if you like of a Seele which some body has. And how can a body have a Seele’, it is clear that the discussion concerns mind and body. So too, in §§357, 391, 424, 454, and PPF §76. By contrast, in PPF §§23–6 it is primarily the soul that is under discussion, because §23 opens with the observa- tion that ‘religion teaches that the soul can exist when the body has disintegrated’. However, §24 requires some indication that ‘mind’ or ‘soul’ are equally apt. In the case of Empﬁndung the German noun has a much wider appli- cation than the English ‘sensation’. In many contexts, the translation  ‘sensation’ is unproblematic. But in some cases the use of the German Empﬁndung is perfectly natural, while ‘sensation’ would be quite mis- taken. So, for example, in §151 ‘Vielleicht hatte er eine Empﬁndung, die man “das ist leicht” nennen kann’ is to be rendered ‘. . . what may be called the feeling [not “the sensation”] “that’s easy!”’. So too, in §160, one can speak of reading something with the feeling of saying some- thing one has learnt by heart, but not with the sensation of saying some- thing one has learnt by heart. §§272–5 are very problematic in this respect, for ‘Empﬁndung von Rot’ is neither ‘sensation of red’ (where is this sensation? a in the eye?) nor ‘feeling of red’. Since Wittgenstein switched from ‘Rotempﬁndung’ in §272 and §273 to ‘Farbeindruck’ and ‘visueller Eindruck’ in §§275–7, we have translated ‘Empﬁndung von Rot’ as ‘visual impression of red’ in §§272–3 and ‘colour impression’ in §274. Similarly, in §312, where Wittgenstein speaks of Gesichtsem- pﬁndung, we have changed Anscombe’s ‘visual sensation’ (visual sen- sations are, for example, sensations of glare when blinded by strong light) to ‘visual impression’. In §400 Empﬁndung presents yet another difﬁculty: what the idealist has discovered in speaking of the visual room ‘was a new way of speaking, a new comparison, and one could even say, a new Empﬁndung’ a here neither ‘sensation’ or ‘feeling’ nor ‘impres- sion’ will do. We have opted for ‘experience’ as the closest approx- imation, but perhaps what Wittgenstein had in mind was ‘a new  sensibility’. Similar systematic difﬁculties attend the German use of ‘wollen’ and its relation to ‘Wille’ (especially in §§611–19). Anscombe chose to translate the verb in these contexts uniformly by ‘to will’ and its cog- nates, which is highly artiﬁcial as well as misleading. There is no easy solution to the problem, but we have used ‘to want’ and its derivatives where possible, and sometimes (as in §611) both. So too, Vorstellung