Gegenstandes, oder auf seine Farbe, oder auf die Anzahl, etc. etc.” —– Und worin besteht es denn a ‘auf die Form zeigen’, ‘auf die Farbe zeigen’? Philosophical Investigations 19e simple board-games ﬁrst, by watching, and have progressed to more and more complicated ones. He too might be given the explanation “This is the king” a if, for instance, he were being shown chess pieces of a shape unfamiliar to him. This explanation again informs him of the use of the piece only because, as we might say, the place for it was already prepared. In other words, we’ll say that it informs him of the use only if the place is already prepared. And in that case it is so, not because the person to whom we give the explanation already knows rules, but because, in another sense, he has already mastered a game. Consider this further case: I am explaining chess to someone; and I begin by pointing to a chess piece and saying “This is the king; it can move in this-and-this way”, and so on. a In this case we shall say: the words “This is the king” (or “This is called ‘the king’”) are an expla- nation of a word only if the learner already ‘knows what a piece in a game is’. That is, if, for example, he has already played other games, or has watched ‘with understanding’ how other people play a and sim- ilar things. Only then will he, while learning the game, be able to ask relevantly, “What is this called?” a that is, this chess piece. We may say: it only makes sense for someone to ask what something is called if he already knows how to make use of the name. We can, after all, imagine the person who is asked replying: “Decide what to call it yourself” a and now the one who asked would himself be answerable for everything. 32. Someone coming into a foreign country will sometimes learn the language of the inhabitants from ostensive explanations that they give him; and he will often have to guess how to interpret these explana- tions; and sometimes he will guess right, sometimes wrong. And now, I think, we can say: Augustine describes the learning |16| of human language as if the child came into a foreign country and did not understand the language of the country; that is, as if he already had a language, only not this one. Or again, as if the child could already think, only not yet speak. And “think” would here mean something like “talk to himself”. 33. But what if someone objected: “It is not true that one must already be master of a language-game in order to understand an ostensive deﬁnition: rather, one need only a obviously a know (or guess) what the person giving the explanation is pointing at. That is, whether, for example, at the shape of the object, or its colour, or the number and so on.” —– And what does ‘pointing at the shape’, ‘pointing at the colour’, 20 Philosophische Untersuchungen Zeig auf ein Stück Papier! a Und nun zeig auf seine Form, a nun auf seine Farbe, a nun auf seine Anzahl (das klingt seltsam)! a Nun, wie hast du es gemacht? a Du wirst sagen, du habest jedesmal etwas anderes beim Zeigen ‘gemeint’. Und wenn ich frage, wie das vor sich geht, wirst du sagen, du habest deine Aufmerksamkeit auf die Farbe, Form, etc. konzentriert. Nun aber frage ich noch einmal, wie das vor sich geht. Denke, jemand zeigt auf eine Vase und sagt: “Schau das herrliche Blau an! a auf die Form kommt es nicht an. a” Oder: “Schau die herrliche Form an! a die Farbe ist gleichgültig.” Es ist zweifellos, du wirst Verschiedenes tun, wenn du diesen beiden Aufforderungen nachkommst. Aber tust du immer das Gleiche, wenn du deine Aufmerksamkeit auf die Farbe richtest? Stell dir doch verschiedene Fälle vor! Ich will einige andeuten: “Ist dieses Blau das gleiche, wie das dort? Siehst du einen Unterschied?”a Du mischst Farben und sagst: “Dieses Blau des Himmels ist schwer zu treffen.” “Es wird schön, man sieht schon wieder blauen Himmel!” “Schau, wie verschieden diese beiden Blau wirken!” “Siehst du dort das blaue Buch? Bring es her.” “Dieses blaue Lichtsignal bedeutet . . .”