Zeichen ansehen? D. h.: ich frage mich bei seinem Anblick nicht mehr “Was ist das für ein Buchstabe?” a auch sage ich mir natürlich nicht “Ich will bei diesem Zeichen den Laut ‘sch’ aussprechen” a noch auch “Dieses Zeichen erinnert mich irgendwie an den Laut ‘sch’.” (Vergleiche damit die Idee: das Gedächtnisbild unterscheide sich von andern Vorstellungsbildern durch ein besonderes Merkmal.) 167. Was ist nun an dem Satz, das Lesen sei doch ‘ein ganz bestimmter Vorgang’? Das heißt doch wohl, beim Lesen ﬁnde immer ein be- stimmter Vorgang statt, den wir wiedererkennen. a Aber wenn ich nun einmal einen Satz im Druck lese und einandermal nach Morsezeichen schreibe, a ﬁndet hier wirklich der gleiche seelische Vorgang statt? —– Dahingegen ist aber freilich eine Gleichförmigkeit in dem Erlebnis des Lesens einer Druckseite. Denn der Vorgang ist ja ein gleichförmiger. Und es ist ja leicht verständlich, daß sich dieser Vorgang unterscheidet von dem etwa, sich Wörter beim Anblick beliebiger Striche einfallen zu lassen. a Denn schon der bloße Anblick einer gedruckten Zeile ist ja ungemein charakteristisch, d. h., ein ganz spezielles Bild: Die Buchstaben alle  von ungefähr der gleichen Größe, auch der Gestalt nach verwandt,  immer wiederkehrend; die Wörter, die zum großen Teil sich ständig Philosophical Investigations 73e 166. I said that when one reads, the spoken words come ‘in a dis- tinctive way’: but in what way? Isn’t this a ﬁction? Let’s look at  individual letters and attend to the way the sound of the letter comes. Read the letter A. a Now, how did the sound come? a We have no idea what to say about it. —– Now write a small Roman a! a How did the movement of the hand come as you wrote? Differently from the way the sound came when you tried previously? a I looked at the printed letter and wrote the cursive letter; that’s all I know. —– Now  look at the sign  , and let a sound occur to you as you do so; then  utter it. The sound ‘U’ occurred to me; but I could not claim that  there was any essential difference in the kind of way that sound  came. The difference lay in the somewhat different situation. I told myself previously that I was to think of a sound; there was a certain tension present before the sound came. And I did not say ‘U’ automatic- ally as I do when I look at the letter U. Further, that mark was not familiar to me in the way the letters of the alphabet are. I looked at  it, as it were, expectantly, with a certain interest in its shape; as I  looked, I thought of a reversed sigma. —– Imagine having to use this mark regularly as a letter; so that you get used to uttering a particular sound at the sight of it, say the sound “sh”. Can we say anything but that, after a while, this sound comes automatically when we look at the sign? That is to say, I no longer ask myself on seeing it, “What sort of letter is that?” a nor, of course, do I tell myself, “At this sign I’ll utter the sound ‘sh’”, nor yet “This sign somehow reminds me of the sound ‘sh’”. (Compare with this the idea that memory-images are distinguished from other mental images by some special characteristic.) 167. Now what is there in the claim that reading is ‘a quite particular process’? It presumably means that whenever we read, one particular process takes place, which we recognize. a But suppose that I at one time read a sentence from print and at another write it from Morse code a is the mental process really the same? —– On the other hand, there is surely some uniformity in the experience of reading a page of print. For the process is a uniform one. And it is quite easy to under- stand that there is a difference between this process and one of, say, coming up with words at the sight of arbitrary signs. a For the mere look of a printed line is itself extremely |68| characteristic a it presents, that is, a quite special appearance, the letters all roughly the same size, akin in shape too, and always recurring; most of the words constantly 74 Philosophische Untersuchungen