§89(c) Augustine: ‘What, then, is time? I know well enough what it is, provided that nobody asks me; but if I am asked what it is and try to explain, I am bafﬂed.’ Confessions (Penguin Books, Harmondsworth, 1961), Bk. XI, §14 (tr. R. S. Pine-Cofﬁn). 250 Notes to PI 47e–8e ‘ist etwas, worauf man sich besinnen muss’: Anscombe had here  ‘is something that we need to remind ourselves of’. Wittgenstein changed a similar translation by Rhees (TS 226, §97 (p. 64)), substituting  for ‘remind’ and ‘recollect’ the phrase ‘call to mind’. We have followed this. §90(a) Anscombe translated ‘Erscheinungen durchschauen’ as ‘penetrate phenomena’. We have opted for ‘see right into’ in order to conform to Wittgenstein’s preferred translation of durchschauen in §92(a) (see end- note below). ‘call to mind’ (rather than ‘remind ourselves’) was Wittgenstein’s pre- ferred translation of besinnen and besinnt (TS 226, §98 (pp. 64)). §92(a) and (b) The ﬂuidity of the German term Wesen is evident in this remark, making it singularly difﬁcult to translate. For Wittgenstein is deliberately playing on the ambiguity of the German term. He himself changed Rhees’s translation of Wesen as ‘essence’ to ‘nature’ in the ﬁrst two occurrences, but left it in the third. In the fourth occurrence in para- graph (b) Wittgenstein ﬁrst changed Rhees’s ‘The essence is hidden from us’ to ‘The nature is hidden to us’. He then wrote an alternative draft to this above it: namely, ‘The essence is what’s hidden’. We have not followed all his changes, which we suspect were precipitate and not fully thought through. We have chosen to retain ‘essence’ in the ﬁrst occurrence, since the conception being subjected to critical scrutiny is that according to which the essence of things is to be revealed by depth analysis. The sec- ond sentence of (a) concedes that we are trying to understand the nature of language. The concept of a language being, in Wittgenstein’s view, a family-resemblance concept, language has no essence, i.e. deﬁning char- acteristic marks (Merkmale); but it does not follow that it doesn’t have a nature a just as propositions or numbers have a speciﬁable nature but no essence. In the third occurrence, ‘essence’ is the appropriate trans- lation, since what is again under discussion is the putative hidden essence that is to be dug out by analysis, and is not to be found by a surveyable ordering of familiar grammatical features of the uses of expressions. We have retained ‘essence’ for the fourth and ﬁnal occurrence in paragraph (b), since the idea that the Wesen of language or of a proposition is hidden belongs to the conception that Wittgenstein is now criticizing, and is to be contrasted with the conception of the nature of language or proposition as being in full view, and to be rendered surveyable by an ordering of familiar features of usage. Notes to PI 48e–50e 251 §92(a) ‘durch Ordnen übersichtlich wird’: Anscombe had ‘becomes sur- veyable by a rearrangement’. For Ordnen Wittgenstein had ‘a process of ordering’ (TS 226, §100 (p. 64)). We have followed this. ‘was wir sehen, wenn wir die Sache durschauen’: Anscombe had ‘which we see when we look into the thing’. Wittgenstein corrected Rhees’s trans- lation ‘which we see when we look through the thing’ to ‘which we see when we see into the thing’. §94 ‘die Sublimierung / sublimieren’: Anscombe translated this as ‘the subliming’ and ‘to sublime’, but what Wittgenstein has employed here is a chemical trope: namely, ‘the sublimation’ and ‘to sublimate’. ‘der ganzen Darstellung’: strictly speaking, this means ‘of the whole (re)presentation’, but Anscombe’s translation: ‘our whole account of logic’ is a variant on Wittgenstein’s changes to Rhees’s translation (TS 226, §104 (p. 67)). ‘ein reines Mittelwesen anzunehmen zwischen dem Satzzeichen und den Tatsachen’: Wittgenstein changed Rhees’s translation to read ‘The