B3376.W563P53 2009 192—dc22 2009023572 A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library. Set in 10.5/13pt Sabon by Graphicraft Limited, Hong Kong Printed in Singapore 1 2009 Editors’ and Translators’ Acknowledgements for the Fourth Edition The idea that we should produce a revised translation of Wittgenstein’s Philosophische Untersuchungen was brought up at what turned out to be one of the last meetings of the Wittgenstein trustees. We and our colleagues a Nicholas Denyer, Anthony Kenny and Anselm Müller a came to the conclusion that it would be best to build on the founda- tions laid by G. E. M. Anscombe in her translation of Wittgenstein’s second great work. The trustees, with the exception of Anthony Kenny, became members of what is now the Wittgenstein editorial advisory com- mittee. This group was joined by David McKitterick, the Librarian of Trinity College, Cambridge, who has been an enthusiastic supporter of our project. We are greatly indebted to him for his help. We thought that a few months’ individual work and three or four weeks together would sufﬁce to complete the task. With that in mind, we applied to the Rockefeller Center at Bellagio on Lake Como for a period of residence to work together, and were granted a stay of four weeks in these beautiful surroundings. But although each of us had spent several months preparing for our meeting, we found that the amount of work still necessary was far greater than anticipated. The shock of discovering that we would be lucky to reach §189 by the end of our stay was mitigated by the generous hospitality offered by the Rockefeller Center in September–October 2006. It was evident that far more time than originally anticipated was neces- sary, and we had to ensure that we could meet periodically to discuss the work each of us did independently. In this we were greatly helped by St John’s College, Oxford, and the Philosophy Department of the University of Zürich, whose assistance enabled us to have a further four extended meetings. Moreover, in the summer of 2007 the Kalischer fam- ily gave us the use of their magniﬁcent home in Berlin, which made it possible for us to spend a fortnight’s intense discussions in this locus amoenus. vi Editors’ and Translators’ Acknowledgements When we had a complete draft, we thought to beneﬁt from responses  of Wittgenstein scholars to our revised translation. We applied to the European Translation Centre in Athens for a week’s stay in their resi- dence at Lefkes on the island of Paros. Generous ﬁnancial support was forthcoming from Trinity College, Cambridge, and when it was found that we had failed to allow for the fact that the value of currencies tends to ﬂuctuate, the Faculty of Philosophy of Oxford University and the University of Athens stepped in to help. So, we met for a week at Lefkes to discuss the fruit of our labours with Hanjo Glock, Anthony Kenny, Vassiliki Kindi, Brian McGuinness, Eike von Savigny, Severin Schroeder, Edna Ullmann-Margalit and Stelios Virvidakis. Anthony Kenny’s chair- manship of the meetings was exemplary, and we are grateful to him for steering us through the shoals and rapids. We are especially indebted to Vassiliki Kindi, who surpassed herself as organizer, helpmate, con- tributor to our discussions and friend. These intense and lengthy dis- cussions led to a great number of changes in our revised translation. In addition, we received long and invaluable lists of speciﬁc comments and questions from Brian McGuinness and Eike von Savigny, both before and after the meetings on Paros. Questions on or relevant to our revised translation were raised in correspondence with Hanoch Ben-Yami, Stewart Candlish, Lars Hertzberg, Wolfgang Kienzler, Grant Luckhardt and Josef Rothhaupt. We also proﬁted from examining speciﬁc points discussed in writings by Stewart Candlish, Roland Hall and David Stern. Patience is a publisher’s crowning virtue. We thank Nick Bellorini of Wiley-Blackwell for unstintingly exercising this virtue in our regard. And we are most grateful to Jean van Altena for her copy-editing and invalu- able suggestions for improvement. P. M. S. Hacker Joachim Schulte Contents Editorial Preface to the Fourth Edition and Modiﬁed Translation viii The Text of the Philosophische Untersuchungen xviii Philosophische Untersuchungen Philosophical Investigations 1 Philosophie der Psychologie – Ein Fragment Philosophy of Psychology – A Fragment 182 Endnotes 244 Register 267 Index 288 Editorial Preface to the 