We might think it strange. “He doesn’t play our game at all,” one would like to say. Or even: “This is a different kind of human being.” If he used the words “if” and “but” as we do, wouldn’t we think he understood them as we do? 41. One misjudges the psychological interest of the if-feeling if one regards it as the obvious correlate of a meaning; it needs, rather, to be seen in a different context, in that of the special circumstances in which it occurs. 42. Does a person never have the if-feeling unless he is uttering the word “if”? Surely it is at least curious if this cause is the only one to pro- duce this feeling. And this applies generally to the ‘atmosphere’ of a word: a why does one regard it so much as a matter of course that only this word has this atmosphere? 43. The if-feeling is not a feeling which accompanies the word “if”. 44. The if-feeling should be comparable to the special ‘feeling’ which a musical phrase gives us. (One sometimes describes such a feeling by saying “Here it is as if a conclusion were being drawn”, or “I should like to say ‘therefore . . .’”, or “Here I should always like to make a gesture a” and then one makes it.) 45. But can this feeling be separated from the phrase? And yet it is not the phrase itself, for someone can hear it without this feeling. 46. Is it in this respect similar to the ‘expression’ with which the phrase is played? 47. We say this passage gives us a quite special feeling. We sing it  to ourselves, and at the same time make a certain movement, and also perhaps have some special feeling. But in a different context we would not recognize these accompaniments a the movement, the feeling a at all. They are quite empty, except just when we are singing this pas- sage. |183| 48. “I sing it with a quite particular expression.” This expression is not something that can be separated from the passage. It is a different con- cept. (A different game.) 192 Philosophie der Psychologie a Ein Fragment vi 49. Das Erlebnis ist diese Stelle, so gespielt (so, wie ich es etwa vor- mache; eine Beschreibung könnte es nur andeuten). 50. Die vom Ding untrennbare Atmosphäre, a sie ist also keine Atmosphäre. Was mit einander innig assoziiert ist, assoziiert wurde, das scheint zueinander zu passen. Aber wie scheint es das? wie äußert sich’s, daß es zu passen scheint? Etwa so: Wir können uns nicht denken, daß der Mann, der diesen Namen, dies Gesicht, diese Schriftzüge hatte, nicht diese Werke, sondern etwa ganz andere (die eines anderen großen Mannes) hervorgebracht hat. Wir können uns das nicht denken? Versuchen wir’s denn? a 51. Es könnte so sein: Ich höre, es male jemand ein Bild “Beethoven beim Schreiben der neunten Symphonie”. Ich könnte mir leicht vorstellen, was etwa auf so einem Bild zu sehen wäre. Aber wie, wenn Einer darstellen wollte, wie Goethe ausgesehen hätte beim Schreiben der neunten Symphonie? Da wüßte ich mir nichts vorzustellen, was nicht peinlich und lächerlich wäre. Philosophy of Psychology a A Fragment vi 192e 49. The experience is this passage played like this (that is, as I am demon- strating, for instance; a description could only hint at it). 50. An atmosphere that is inseparable from its object a is no atmo- sphere. Closely associated things, things which have been associated, seem to ﬁt one another. But in what way do they seem to ﬁt? How does it come out that they seem to ﬁt? Like this, for example: we cannot ima- gine the man who had this name, this face, this handwriting, not to have produced these works, but perhaps quite different ones instead (those of another great man). We cannot imagine it? Do we try? a 51. It might be like this: I hear that someone is painting a picture “Beethoven writing the Ninth Symphony”. I could easily imagine the kind of thing such a picture would show us. But suppose someone wanted to represent what Goethe would have looked like writing the Ninth Symphony? Here I could imagine nothing that would not be embar- rassing and ridiculous. |184| vii 52. Leute, die uns nach dem Erwachen gewisse Begebenheiten erzählen