 About the pagination of this eBook  Due to the unique page numbering scheme of this book, the  electronic pagination of the eBook does not match the pagination  of the printed version. To navigate the text, please use the  electronic Table of Contents that appears alongside the eBook or  the Search function.  For citation purposes, use the page numbers that appear in the text.  Über die Paginierung dieses Buches    Aufgrund des eindeutigen Schemas der Seitennummerierung dieses Buches, passt die  Paginierung des eBooks und die Paginierung der gedruckten Version nicht zusammen.   Benutzen Sie bitte, um im Text zu navigieren, das elektronische Inhaltsverzeichnis, das  neben dem eBook oder neben der Suchfunktion erscheint.     Benutzen Sie für Zitierzwecke die Seitenzahlen, die im Text erscheinen.    PHILOSOPHISCHE UNTERSUCHUNGEN PHILOSOPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS PHILOSOPHISCHE UNTERSUCHUNGEN PHILOSOPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN Translated by G. E. M. Anscombe, P. M. S. Hacker and  Joachim Schulte Revised fourth edition by P. M. S. Hacker and Joachim Schulte This fourth edition ﬁrst published 2009 © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Edition history: Basil Blackwell Ltd (1e, 1953; 2e, 1958);  Blackwell Publishing Ltd (3e, 2001) Blackwell Publishing was acquired by John Wiley & Sons in February 2007.  Blackwell’s publishing program has been merged with Wiley’s global Scientiﬁc,  Technical, and Medical business to form Wiley-Blackwell. Registered Ofﬁce John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex,  PO19 8SQ, United Kingdom Editorial Ofﬁces 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148-5020, USA 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK For details of our global editorial ofﬁces, for customer services, and for  information about how to apply for permission to reuse the copyright  material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell. The right of Peter Hacker and Joachim Schulte to be identiﬁed as the authors of  the editorial material in this work has been asserted in accordance with the  Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in  a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic,  mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted by  the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission  of the publisher. Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats.  Some content that appears in print may not be available in electronic books. Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed  as trademarks. All brand names and product names used in this book are  trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective  owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this  book. This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in  regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher  is not engaged in rendering professional services. If professional advice or other expert  assistance is required, the services of a competent professional should be sought. Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 1889–1951. [Philosophische Untersuchungen. English] Philosophical investigations / Ludwig Wittgenstein ; translated by G.E.M. Anscombe,  P.M.S. Hacker, and Joachim Schulte. — Rev. 4th ed. / by P.M.S. Hacker and Joachim  Schulte. p. cm. English and German. Includes bibliographical references and index. ISBN 978-1-4051-5928-9 (hardcover : alk. paper) — ISBN 978-1-4051-5929-6 (pbk. : alk. paper) 1. Philosophy. 2. Language and languages—Philosophy. 3. Semantics (Philosophy) I. Anscombe, G. E. M. (Gertrude Elizabeth Margaret) II. Hacker, P. M. S.  (Peter Michael Stephan) III. Schulte, Joachim. IV. Title.