wir uns darunter vorstellen sollen a es sei denn, du selbst setzt fest, was so genannt werden soll. Aber es wird dir schwer werden, so eine Festsetzung zu treffen; eine, die dich befriedigt. 89. Wir stehen mit diesen Überlegungen an dem Ort, wo das Problem steht: Inwiefern ist die Logik etwas Sublimes? Denn es schien, daß ihr eine besondere Tiefe a allgemeine Bedeutung a zukomme. Sie liege, so schien es, am Grunde aller Wissenschaften. Philosophical Investigations 46e 88. If I tell someone “Stay roughly here” a may this explanation not work perfectly? And may not any other one fail too? “But still, isn’t it an inexact explanation?” a Yes, why shouldn’t  one call it “inexact”? Only let’s understand what “inexact” means!  For it does not mean “unusable”. And let’s consider what we call  an “exact” explanation in contrast to this one. Perhaps like drawing a boundary-line around a region with chalk? Here it strikes us at once that the line has breadth. So a colour edge would be more exact. But has this exactness still got a function here: isn’t it running idle? Moreover, we haven’t yet laid down what is to count as overstepping this sharp boundary; how, with what instruments, it is to be ascer- tained. And so on. We understand what it means to set a pocket-watch to the exact  time, or to regulate it to be exact. But what if it were asked: Is this exactness ideal exactness? Or: How nearly does it approach the ideal? a Of course we can speak of measurements of time in which there  is a different, and as we should say a greater, exactness than in the  measurement of time by a pocket-watch; in which the words “to set the clock to the exact time” have a different, though related, meaning and ‘to tell the time’ is a different process, and so on. a Now, if I tell someone: “You should come to dinner more punctually; you know it begins at one o’clock exactly” a is there really no question of exact- ness here? After all, one can say: “Think of the determination of time in the laboratory or the observatory; there you see what ‘exactness’ means.” |42| “Inexact” is really a reproach, and “exact” is praise. And that is to say that what is inexact attains its goal less perfectly than does what is more exact. So it all depends on what we call “the goal”. Is it inex- act when I don’t give our distance from the sun to the nearest metre, or tell a joiner the width of a table to the nearest thousandth of a mil- limetre? No single ideal of exactness has been envisaged; we do not know what we are to make of this idea a unless you yourself stipulate what is to be so called. But you’ll ﬁnd it difﬁcult to make such a stipulation a one that satisﬁes you. 89. With these considerations we ﬁnd ourselves facing the problem: In what way is logic something sublime? For logic seemed to have a peculiar depth a a universal signiﬁcance. Logic lay, it seemed, at the foundation of all the sciences. a For logical * * * 47 Philosophische Untersuchungen a Denn die logische Betrachtung erforscht das Wesen aller Dinge. Sie will den Dingen auf den Grund sehen, und soll sich nicht um das So oder So des tatsächlichen Geschehens kümmern. —– Sie entspringt nicht einem Interesse für Tatsachen des Naturgeschehens, noch dem Bedürfnisse, kausale Zusammenhänge zu erfassen. Sondern einem Streben, das Fundament, oder Wesen, alles Erfahrungsmäßigen zu verstehen. Nicht aber, als sollten wir dazu neue Tatsachen aufspüren: es ist vielmehr für unsere Untersuchung wesentlich, daß wir nichts Neues mit ihr lernen wollen. Wir wollen etwas verstehen, was schon offen vor unsern Augen liegt. Denn das scheinen wir, in irgend einem Sinne, nicht zu verstehen. Augustinus (Conf. XI/14): “quid est ergo tempus? si nemo ex me quaerat scio; si quaerenti explicare velim, nescio.” a Dies könnte man nicht von einer Frage der Naturwissenschaft sagen (etwa der nach dem speziﬁschen Gewicht des Wasserstoffs). Das, was man weiß, wenn uns