59. “Namen bezeichnen nur das, was Element der Wirklichkeit ist. Was sich nicht zerstören läßt; was in allem Wandel gleichbleibt.” a Aber was ist das? a Während wir den Satz sagten, schwebte es uns ja schon vor! Wir sprachen schon eine ganz bestimmte Vorstellung aus. Ein be- stimmtes Bild, das wir verwenden wollen. Denn die Erfahrung zeigt  uns diese Elemente ja nicht. Wir sehen Bestandteile von etwas Zusammengesetztem (eines Sessels z. B.). Wir sagen, die Lehne ist ein Teil des Sessels, aber selbst wieder zusammengesetzt aus verschiedenen Hölzern; während ein Fuß ein einfacher Bestandteil ist. Wir sehen auch ein Ganzes, was sich ändert (zerstört wird) während seine Bestandteile unverändert bleiben. Dies sind die Materialien, aus denen wir jenes Bild der Wirklichkeit anfertigen. 60. Wenn ich nun sage: “Mein Besen steht in der Ecke”, a ist dies eigentlich eine Aussage über den Besenstiel und die Bürste des Besens? Jedenfalls könnte man doch die Aussage ersetzen durch eine, die die Lage des Stiels und die Lage der Bürste angibt. Und diese Aussage ist doch nun eine weiter analysierte Form der ersten. a Warum aber nenne ich sie “weiter analysiert”? a Nun, wenn der Besen sich dort beﬁndet, so heißt das doch, es müssen Stiel und Bürste dort sein und in bestimmter Lage zueinander; und dies war früher gleichsam im Sinn des Satzes ver- borgen, und im analysierten Satz ist es ausgesprochen. Also meint der, Philosophical Investigations 33e It looks to us as if we were saying something about the nature of red in saying that the words “Red exists” do not make sense. Namely, that red exists ‘in and of itself’. The same idea a that this is a metaphys- ical statement about red a ﬁnds expression again when we say such a thing as that red is timeless, and perhaps still more strongly in the word “indestructible”. But what we really want is simply to take “Red exists” as the state- ment: the word “red” has a meaning. Or, perhaps more correctly, “Red does not exist” as “‘Red’ has no meaning”. Only we do not want to say that that expression says this, but that this is what it would have to be saying if it made sense a that the expression actually contradicts itself in the attempt |29| to say that just because red exists ‘in and of itself’. Whereas the only contradiction lies in something like this: the sentence looks as if it were about the colour, while it is supposed to be saying something about the use of the word “red”. a In reality, how- ever, we quite readily say that a particular colour exists, and that is as much as to say that something exists that has that colour. And the ﬁrst expression is no less accurate than the second; particularly where ‘what has the colour’ is not a physical object. 59. “A name signiﬁes only what is an element of reality a what can- not be destroyed, what remains the same in all changes.” a But what is that? a Even as we uttered the sentence, that’s what we already had in mind! We already gave expression to a quite speciﬁc idea, a particu- lar picture that we wanted to use. For experience certainly does not show us these elements. We see constituent parts of something com- posite (a chair, for instance). We say that the back is part of the chair, but that it itself is composed of different pieces of wood; whereas a leg is a simple constituent part. We also see a whole which changes (is destroyed) while its constituent parts remain unchanged. These are the materials from which we construct that picture of reality. 60. When I say “My broom is in the corner”, is this really a statement about the broomstick and the brush? Well, it could at any rate be replaced by a statement giving the position of the stick and the position of the brush. And this statement is surely a further analysed form of the ﬁrst one. a But why do I call it “further analysed”? a Well, if the broom is there, that surely means that the stick and brush must be there, and in a particular relation to one another; and previously this was, as it were, hidden in the sense of the ﬁrst sentence, and is articulated in the analysed sentence. Then does someone who says that the broom is in 34