holen will und er entschwindet plötzlich meinem Blick? —– “Also war es kein Sessel, sondern irgend eine Täuschung.” —– Aber in ein paar Sekunden sehen wir ihn wieder und können ihn angreifen, etc. —– “Also war der Sessel doch da und sein Verschwinden war irgend eine Täuschung.” —– Aber nimm an, nach einer Zeit verschwindet er wieder, a oder scheint zu verschwinden. Was sollen wir nun sagen? Hast du für solche Fälle Regeln bereit, a die sagen, ob man so etwas noch “Sessel” nennen darf? Aber gehen sie uns beim Gebrauch des Wortes “Sessel” ab; und sollen wir sagen, daß wir mit diesem Wort eigentlich keine Bedeutung verbinden, da wir nicht für alle Möglichkeiten seiner Anwendung mit Regeln ausgerüstet sind? 81. F. P. Ramsey hat einmal im Gespräch mit mir betont, die Logik  sei eine ‘normative Wissenschaft’. Genau welche Idee ihm dabei vorschwebte, weiß ich nicht; sie war aber zweifellos eng verwandt  mit der, die mir erst später aufgegangen ist: daß wir nämlich in der Philosophical Investigations 42e the meaning of the name “N”: I believe that a human being has lived, whom (1) I have seen in such-and-such places, who (2) looked like this (pictures), (3) has done such-and-such things, and (4) bore the name “N” in civic life. a Asked what I mean by “N”, I’d enumerate all or some of these points, and different ones on different occasions. So my deﬁnition of “N” would perhaps be “the man of whom all this is true”. a But if some point were now to turn out to be false? a Would I be prepared to declare the proposition “N is dead” false a even if what has turned out to be false is only something which strikes me as insigniﬁcant? But where are the boundaries of what is insigniﬁcant? a If I had given an explanation of the name in such a case, I’d now be ready to alter it. And this can be expressed as follows: I use the name “N” without a ﬁxed meaning. (But that impairs its use as little as the use of a table is impaired by the fact that it stands on four legs instead of three and so sometimes wobbles.) Should it be said that I’m using a word whose meaning I don’t know, and so am talking nonsense? a Say what you please, so long as it does not prevent you from seeing how things are. (And when you see that, there will be some things that you won’t say.) (The ﬂuctuation of scientiﬁc deﬁnitions: what today counts as an |38| observed concomitant of phenomenon A will tomorrow be used to deﬁne “A”.) 80. I say, “There is a chair over there”. What if I go to fetch it, and it suddenly disappears from sight? —– “So it wasn’t a chair, but some kind of illusion.” —– But a few seconds later, we see it again and are able to touch it, and so on. —– “So the chair was there after all, and its disappearance was some kind of illusion.” —– But suppose that after a time it disappears again a or seems to disappear. What are we to say now? Have you rules ready for such cases a rules saying whether such a thing is still to be called a “chair”? But do we miss them when we use the word “chair”? And are we to say that we do not really attach any meaning to this word, because we are not equipped with rules for every possible application of it? 81. F. P. Ramsey once emphasized in conversation with me that logic was a ‘normative science’. I do not know exactly what idea he had in mind, but it was doubtless closely related to one that dawned on me only later: namely, that in philosophy we often compare the use of words * 43 Philosophische Untersuchungen Philosophie den Gebrauch der Wörter oft mit Spielen, Kalkülen nach festen Regeln, vergleichen, aber nicht sagen können, wer die Sprache gebraucht, müsse ein solches Spiel spielen. —– Sagt man nun aber, daß unser sprachlicher Ausdruck sich solchen Kalkülen nur nähert, so steht man damit unmittelbar am Rande eines Mißverständnisses. Denn so kann es scheinen, als redeten wir in der Logik von einer idealen Sprache. Als