to Wittgenstein’s published works are by title and either section or page number. x Editorial Preface to the Fourth Edition Philosophy of Psychology I and II). A few remarks are taken from these earlier typescripts; some originate in MS 169 (which is contemporary with the later part of MS 137); another few have not been traced to earlier manuscript sources. It is not known whether the typescript used for printing the ﬁrst edition of ‘Part II’ of the Investigations (TS 234) was copied by a typist from MS 144 or dictated to the typist by Wittgenstein. There is evidence that some mistakes were made in the composition of the typescript. It can safely be said that there are at least two points where the order of remarks intended by Wittgenstein and clearly indicated in MS 144 was not respected in TS 234. These errors were pointed out by G. H. von Wright;2 they have been rectiﬁed here (see PPF §§220–1 and §§235–6). It is clear that the remarks that were collected together in TS 234, as well as their arrangement, are very uneven. There is every reason to think that Wittgenstein would have made many changes had he con- tinued to work on this material. Some of these changes would have con- sisted in shifting individual remarks to different positions, in joining separate paragraphs to other ones, and in severing sentences or para- graphs from certain remarks. Other changes would have involved redrafting and correcting sentences that were badly drafted or poorly adjusted to their context (some of these requirements will be pointed out in the endnotes). Readers of Philosophy of Psychology b A Fragment will be well advised to bear in mind that what we have there, unlike the Investigations, is work in progress. A prominent feature of the Anscombe–Rhees edition of what they called ‘Part II’ is the subdivision of the text into ‘sections’ numbered i to xiv. The editors’ reasons for inserting these headings were in part external. As von Wright pointed out, in the manuscript ‘each section begins and ends on a sheet of its own’.3 However, as no copy of TS 234 is extant, we know nothing about the external characteristics of this typescript, and accordingly we cannot judge to what extent the cri- terion mentioned by von Wright may have been relevant to the editors’ decisions. In the case of the earlier sections it is often clear on the basis of the content of the remarks why they were grouped as they are. However, when one turns to section xi, it becomes equally clear that 2 G. H. von Wright, ‘The Troubled History of Part II of the Investigations’, Grazer philosophische Studien 42 (1992), p. 184. Cf. J. Schulte’s Kritisch-genetische Edition of Philosophische Untersuchungen (Suhrkamp, Frankfurt am Main, 2001). 3 von Wright, ‘Troubled History’, p. 183. Editorial Preface to the Fourth Edition xi Wittgenstein or his editors simply abandoned the project of arranging these remarks in an order analogous to that of sections i to x and xii to xiv. In the present edition, we have retained the old section headings, but our principal means of organizing the text and facilitating refer- ence to passages from it is a simple numbering of individual remarks along the lines of Wittgenstein’s own system in the Investigations. This method has the additional advantage of forestalling doubts about whether a paragraph beginning on a new page belongs to the same remark as the last paragraph on the previous page a a difﬁculty encountered on several pages of former editions. 3. The German text The most important source for the German text of Philosophische Untersuchungen printed here is the ﬁrst edition of the book (1953). This was based on one of three copies of the typescript of the Investigations and on what was apparently the sole copy (the missing TS 234) of what became ‘Part II’ of the book.4 As far as we know, the text of the 1953 edition is on the whole very reliable. Work on Wittgenstein’s Nachlass led to the critical edition (2001) of  the currently extant typescripts of the earlier drafts of the Philosophical Investigations, as well as of the manuscript (MS 144) on which Part II was based. In this critical-genetic edition, many passages were elucidated by quotations from earlier manuscript versions of relevant remarks. In the light of this edition and additional work on the Nachlass, we have prepared a German text which differs from that of the ﬁrst three edi- tions in various respects. We have corrected a few obvious misprints like ‘Wage’ (§§142, 182, 259) in place of ‘Waage’ (often but by no means always