Betonungen anwende, Zeichen unterstreiche, in der und der Weise untereinander schreibe, und dergleichen.) a Und nun setzt er einmal die Reihe selbständig fort, a oder er tut es nicht. a Aber warum sagst du das; das ist selbstverständlich! a Freilich; ich wollte nur sagen: die Wirkung jeder weiteren Erklärung hänge von seiner Reaktion ab. Aber nehmen wir nun an, er setzt, nach einigen Bemühungen des Lehrers, die Reihe richtig fort, d. h. so, wie wir es tun. Nun können wir also sagen: er beherrscht das System. a Aber wie weit muß er die Reihe richtig fortsetzen, damit wir das mit Recht sagen können? Es ist klar: du kannst hier keine Begrenzung angeben. 146. Wenn ich nun frage: “Hat er das System verstanden, wenn er die Reihe hundert Stellen weit fortsetzt?” Oder a wenn ich in unserm pri- mitiven Sprachspiel nicht von ‘verstehen’ reden soll: Hat er das System inne, wenn er die Reihe bis dorthin richtig fortsetzt? a Da wirst du vielleicht sagen: Das System innehaben (oder auch, verstehen) kann nicht darin bestehen, daß man die Reihe bis zu dieser, oder bis zu jener Zahl fortsetzt; das ist nur die Anwendung des Verstehens. Das Verstehen selbst ist ein Zustand, woraus die richtige Verwendung entspringt. Philosophical Investigations 63e Perhaps it is possible to wean him from the systematic mistake (as from a bad habit). Or perhaps one accepts his way of copying and tries to teach him the normal one as an offshoot, a variant of his. a And here too, our pupil’s ability to learn may come to an end. 144. What do I mean when I say “the pupil’s ability to learn may come to an end here”? Do I report this from my own experience? Of course not. (Even if I have had such experience.) Then what am I doing with that remark? After all, I’d like you to say: “Yes, it’s true, one could imagine that too, that might happen too!” a But was I trying to draw someone’s attention to the fact that he is able to imagine that? —– I wanted to put that picture before him, and his acceptance of the picture consists in his now being inclined to regard a given case differently: that is, to compare it with this sequence of pictures. I have changed his way of looking at things. (Indian mathematicians: “Look at this!”) 145. Suppose the pupil now writes the series 0 to 9 to our satisfac- tion. a And this will be the case only if he is often successful, not if he does it right once in a hundred attempts. Now I continue to guide him through the series and draw his attention to the recurrence of the ﬁrst series in the units; and then to its recurrence in the tens. (Which means only that I use particular emphases, underline ﬁgures, write them one under another in such-and-such ways, and similar things.) a And now at some point he continues the series by himself a or he does  not. a But why do you say that? That much is obvious! a Of course; I only wished to say: the effect of any further explanation depends on his reaction. Now, however, let us suppose that after some efforts on the teacher’s part he continues the series correctly, that is, as we do it. So now we can say that he has mastered the system. a But how far does he have to continue |58| the series correctly for us to be able rightly to say that? Clearly, you cannot state a limit here. 146. Suppose I now ask: “Has he understood the system if he contin- ues the series to the hundredth place?” Or, if I shouldn’t speak of ‘under- standing’ in our primitive language-game: has he got the system if he continues the series correctly up to this point? a Perhaps you will say here: to have got the system (or again, to understand it) can’t consist in continuing the series up to this or that number: that is only apply- ing one’s understanding. Understanding itself is a state which is the source of the correct use. * 64 Philosophische Untersuchungen Und an was denkt man da eigentlich? Denkt man nicht an das Ableiten einer Reihe aus ihrem algebraischen Ausdruck? Oder doch an etwas Analoges? a Aber da waren wir ja schon einmal. Wir können uns ja eben mehr als eine Anwendung eines algebraischen Ausdrucks