Fourth Edition and  Modiﬁed Translation 1. The previous editions and translation The Philosophical Investigations was published in 1953, edited by  G. E. M. Anscombe and Rush Rhees, and translated by Anscombe. A second edition was published in 1958, in which minor corrections (mis- spellings and punctuation) to the German text were made, and a large number of small changes and 28 signiﬁcant alterations were made to the English text. In 2003, after Anscombe’s death, a third, 50-year anniver- sary edition was published by Nicholas Denyer with a small number of further alterations to the translation that Anscombe had made over the years in her copy of the previously published text. The third edition unfortunately did not follow the pagination of the ﬁrst two editions. Anscombe’s translation was an impressive achievement. She invented  an English equivalent for Wittgenstein’s distinctive, often colloquial, style. This was no mean feat. For she had to ﬁnd not only English analogues  of Wittgenstein’s stylistic idiosyncracies, but also an English rhythm that would convey the character of Wittgenstein’s carefully crafted prose. Her success is indisputable. Nevertheless, there are errors of different kinds in the ﬁrst three  editions and in the translation. It was because of these that the Wittgenstein editorial advisory committee agreed to the production of a new edition. But, given the excellence of the Anscombe translation, it was resolved that rather than making a completely new one, we should build on Anscombe’s achievement and produce a modiﬁed translation, rectifying any errors or misjudgements we discerned in hers. It should be emphasized that many of the errors in the Anscombe–Rhees editions could not have been identiﬁed in the 1950s, prior to the availability and extensive study of the Wittgenstein Nachlass, some crucial items of which did not come to light until decades later. Editorial Preface to the Fourth Edition ix 2. The fourth edition The most important editorial change we have made is to drop the divi- sion of the book into two parts. What was Part I is now the Philosophical Investigations, and what was Part II is now named Philosophy of Psychology a A Fragment (which we abbreviate ‘PPF’). We explain our reasons for this alteration in the essay on the history of the text of the Investigations below. A further important change we have introduced is to print the slips that were added by Wittgenstein to the typed text of the Philosophical Investigations in boxes in their designated places wherever that is now known, rather than at the foot of the relevant page as Randbemerkungen. The rationales for their relocations are given severally in endnotes. In a couple of places, we have introduced Wittgenstein’s original  squiggles or drawings. In §169 a meaningless sequence of typograph- ical symbols was typed into the text as a substitute for the ‘arbitrary pothooks and squiggles’ (mentioned in §168) that are evident in Eine Philosophische Betrachtung, p. 182. So we have reproduced the latter. Again, PPF §108 beneﬁts from the insertion of the little drawing, printed in Last Writings on the Philosophy of Psychology I, §88, which illustrates the remark that different concepts touch and run side by side for a stretch, but one shouldn’t think that all such lines are circles. Because the new edition is also a modiﬁed translation, with some trans- lated sentences longer than hitherto and others shorter, it has not been  possible to preserve the identical pagination of the ﬁrst and second  editions. Since the vast majority of English writings on Wittgenstein  have made copious references to those editions, we have inserted the pagination of the ﬁrst two editions in the text between small verticals (e.g. |123| ) at the points of page-breaks. There are some editorial changes in the new edition of what was pre- viously referred to as ‘Part II’. The lost TS 234 was based on MS 144, which consists of loose sheets clipped into a folder.1 It is not known to what extent the present order of sheets was Wittgenstein’s (the folia- tion is not in his hand). Most of the remarks collected in this folder come from MSS 137 and 138, that is, from manuscripts that were  written between October 1948 and spring 1949 and hence not used for the dictation of TSS 229 and 232 (published as Remarks on the 1 All references to Wittgenstein’s Nachlass are to von Wright number, followed by page number or section number (§) or both, as in the Bergen electronic edition. References