Andre “den Schmerz des L.W.” genannt haben, so geschähe den Andern damit kein Unrecht, solange nur eine Notation vorgesehen wäre, in der der Ausfall des Wortes “Schmerz” in anderen Verbindungen irgendwie ersetzt würde. Die Andern werden dann dennoch bedauert, vom Arzt behandelt, u. s. w. Es wäre natürlich auch kein Einwand gegen diese Ausdrucksweise, zu sagen: “Aber die Andern haben ja genau dasselbe, was du hast!” Aber was hätte ich dann von dieser neuen Art der Darstellung? Nichts. Aber der Solipsist will ja auch keine praktischen Vorteile, wenn er seine Anschauung vertritt! 404. “Wenn ich sage ‘ich habe Schmerzen’, weise ich nicht auf eine Person, die die Schmerzen hat, da ich in gewissem Sinne gar nicht weiß, wer sie hat.” Und das läßt sich rechtfertigen. Denn vor allem: Ich sagte ja nicht, die und die Person habe Schmerzen, sondern “ich habe . . .”. Nun, damit nenne ich ja keine Person. So wenig, wie dadurch, daß ich vor Schmerz stöhne. Obwohl der Andre aus dem Stöhnen ersieht, wer Schmerzen hat. Was heißt es denn: wissen, wer Schmerzen hat? Es heißt, z. B., wis- sen, welcher Mensch in diesem Zimmer Schmerzen hat: also, der dort sitzt, oder, der in dieser Ecke steht, der Lange mit den blonden Haaren Philosophical Investigations 129e 402. “It’s true that I say ‘I now have such-and-such a visual image’, but the words ‘I have’ are merely a sign for others; the visual world is described completely by the description of the visual image.” a You mean: the words “I have” are like “Attention please!” You’re inclined to say that it should really have been expressed differently. Perhaps sim- ply by making a sign with one’s hand and then giving a description. a When, as in this case, one disapproves of the expressions of ordinary language (which, after all, do their duty), we have got a picture in our heads which conﬂicts with the picture of our ordinary |122| way of speak- ing. At the same time, we’re tempted to say that our way of speaking does not describe the facts as they really are. As if, for example, the proposition “he has pains” could be false in some other way than by that man’s not having pains. As if the form of expression were saying something false, even when the proposition faute de mieux asserted some- thing true. For this is what disputes between idealists, solipsists and realists look like. The one party attacks the normal form of expression as if they were attacking an assertion; the others defend it, as if they were stat- ing facts recognized by every reasonable human being. 403. If I were to reserve the word “pain” solely for what I had previ- ously called “my pain”, and others “L.W.’s pain”, I’d do other people no injustice, so long as a notation were provided in which the loss of the word “pain” in other contexts were somehow made good. Other people would still be pitied, treated by doctors, and so on. It would, of course, be no objection to this way of talking to say “But look here, other people have just the same as you!” But what would I gain from this new mode of representation? Nothing. But then the solipsist does not want any practical advantage when he advances his view either! 404. “When I say ‘I am in pain’, I don’t point to a person who is in pain, since in a certain sense I don’t know who is.” And this can be given a justiﬁcation. For the main point is: I didn’t say that such-and- such a person was in pain, but “I am . . .”. Now, in saying this, I don’t name any person. Just as I don’t name anyone when I groan with pain. Though someone else sees who is in pain from the groaning. What does it mean to know who is in pain? It means, for example, to know which man in this room is in pain: for instance, that it’s the one who is sitting over there, or the one who is standing in that corner, the tall one over there with the fair hair, and so on. a What am I  * 130 Philosophische Untersuchungen dort, etc. a Worauf will ich hinaus? Darauf, daß es sehr verschiedene