Sondern, wenn es möglich wäre, jemand zu eigenen Gedanken anregen. Ich hätte gerne ein gutes Buch hervorgebracht. Es ist nicht so ausgefallen; aber die Zeit ist vorbei, in der es von mir verbessert werden könnte. Cambridge, im Januar 1945. Preface 4e cut down, in order to give the viewer an idea of the landscape. So this book is really just an album. Until recently I had really given up the idea of publishing my work in my lifetime. All the same, it was revived from time to time, mainly because I could not help noticing that the results of my work (which I had conveyed in lectures, typescripts and discussions), were in |x| cir- culation, frequently misunderstood and more or less watered down or mangled. This stung my vanity, and I had difﬁculty in quieting it. Four years ago, however, I had occasion to reread my ﬁrst book  (the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus) and to explain its ideas. Then it suddenly seemed to me that I should publish those old ideas and the new ones together: that the latter could be seen in the right light  only by contrast with and against the background of my older way of thinking. For since I began to occupy myself with philosophy again, sixteen years ago, I could not but recognize grave mistakes in what I set out in that ﬁrst book. I was helped to realize these mistakes a to a degree which I myself am hardly able to estimate a by the criticism which my ideas encountered from Frank Ramsey, with whom I discussed them in innumerable conversations during the last two years of his life. a Even more than to this a always powerful and assured a criticism, I am indebted to that which a teacher of this university, Mr P. Sraffa, for many years unceasingly applied to my thoughts. It is to this stimulus that I owe the most fruitful ideas of this book. For more than one reason, what I publish here will have points of contact with what other people are writing today. a If my remarks do not bear a stamp which marks them as mine, then I do not wish to lay any further claim to them as my property. I make them public with misgivings. It is not impossible that it should fall to the lot of this work, in its poverty and in the darkness of this time, to bring light into one brain or another a but, of course, it is not likely. I should not like my writing to spare other people the trouble of think- ing. But if possible, to stimulate someone to thoughts of his own. I should have liked to produce a good book. It has not turned out that way, but the time is past in which I could improve it. Cambridge, January 1945. 1. Augustinus, in den Confessionen I/8: cum ipsi (majores homines) appellabant rem aliquam, et cum secundum eam vocem corpus ad ali- quid movebant, videbam, et tenebam hoc ab eis vocari rem illam, quod sonabant, cum eam vellent ostendere. Hoc autem eos velle ex motu cor- poris aperiebatur: tamquam verbis naturalibus omnium gentium, quae ﬁunt vultu et nutu oculorum, ceterorumque membrorum actu, et sonitu vocis indicante affectionem animi in petendis, habendis, rejiciendis, fugien- disve rebus. Ita verba in variis sententiis locis suis posita, et crebro audita, quarum rerum signa essent, paulatim colligebam, measque jam volun- tates, edomito in eis signis ore, per haec enuntiabam.1 In diesen Worten erhalten wir, so scheint es mir, ein bestimmtes Bild von dem Wesen der menschlichen Sprache. Nämlich dieses: Die Wörter der Sprache benennen Gegenstände a Sätze sind Verbindungen von solchen Benennungen. —– In diesem Bild von der Sprache ﬁnden wir die Wurzeln der Idee: Jedes Wort hat eine Bedeutung. Diese Bedeutung  ist dem Wort zugeordnet. Sie ist der Gegenstand, für welchen das Wort steht. Von einem Unterschied der Wortarten spricht Augustinus nicht. Wer das Lernen der Sprache so beschreibt, denkt, so möchte ich glauben, zunächst an Hauptwörter, wie “Tisch”, “Stuhl”, “Brot”, und die Namen von Personen, erst in zweiter Linie an die Namen gewisser