misspelled by Wittgenstein); ‘wir’ in place of ‘wie’ (§282), and ‘Sinneneindrücke’ in place of ‘Sinneseindrücke’ (§486). A few oddities could be clariﬁed by consulting the manuscripts. For example, in §433 the correct version reads, not ‘in welchem Zeichen’, but ‘in welchen Zeichen’; and in §441 the unintelligible ‘daß wir . . . Wunschäußerungen von uns machen’ should read ‘daß wir . . . Wunschäußerungen machen’ 4 The typescripts from which the book was printed were lost sometime after publica- tion. The third copy of the Untersuchungen proper came to light only in 1993. The few points where it deviates from the published text and/or the other extant copy of the typescript are described in J. Schulte’s critical-genetic edition. xii Editorial Preface to the Fourth Edition (Wittgenstein forgot to cross out part of the variant formulation ‘Wunschäußerungen von uns geben’). In TS 227(a), one of the two  surviving typescripts, Wittgenstein crossed out the ‘k’ in ‘keinen’ in §85(b), thus changing the sentence from ‘der Wegweiser lässt doch keinen Zweifel offen’ (‘the signpost does after all leave no room for doubt’) to ‘der Wegweiser lässt doch einen Zweifel offen’ (‘the signpost does after all leave room for doubt’). This, in the context, makes much better sense. Similarly, ‘Gesichtseindruck’ (‘visual impression’) in PPF §231 is a mis- print for ‘Gesichtsausdruck’ (‘facial expression’), as is evident from MS 138, 6b. So too in PPF §306 ‘beim innerlichen Rechnen’ (‘when we made internal calculations’, according to Anscombe’s translation) is almost certainly meant to be ‘beim innerlichen Reden’ (‘when we speak to our- selves silently’) on the model of MS 144, 92. We have made no attempt to normalize Wittgenstein’s characteristic  use of commas; the only exceptions are two or three passages where we omitted a particularly distracting comma after the last item of a long list. An example is PPF §93: ‘daß die Verben “glauben”, “wünschen”, “wollen”, alle die grammatischen Formen aufweisen’; the comma before ‘alle’ has been dropped in our edition. We have, however, stand- ardized his dots signifying ‘and so on’, reducing them to three, with- out any closing full stop when they occur at the end of a sentence. In the typescripts as well as in the previous editions of the Unter- suchungen there are many occurrences of forms like ‘etc.’ where a clos- ing full stop follows an abbreviation. We have decided to print only one full stop in such cases. There are a number of sentences where a closing full stop or question mark is missing. In such cases we have supplied the missing sign. In the case of complete quoted sentences we print the last quotation mark after the closing punctuation mark. This is in conformity with Wittgenstein’s normal practice. A few common expressions have been standardized in the light of Wittgenstein’s usual practice in his manuscripts. These are: ‘gar nicht’, ‘gar nichts’ in place of ‘garnicht’, ‘garnichts’; ‘inwiefern’ in place of ‘in wiefern’; ‘derselbe’ in place of ‘der selbe’; ‘so daß’ in place of ‘sodaß’; ‘statt dessen’ in place of ‘stattdessen’. In accordance with German typographical practice, we have spaced ‘z. B.’, ‘d. h.’, ‘u. s. w.’, etc. We have capitalized nominalized forms where Wittgenstein forgot to do so. In such cases, however, we have exercised our judgement and proceeded with discretion, restricting modiﬁcations of the text to par- ticularly clear and distracting cases where, for example, only one out of several nominalized words in the same sentence is spelled without a capital letter. Editorial Preface to the Fourth Edition xiii 4. The modiﬁed translation Anscombe’s translation is now more than 50 years old, and English has moved on apace. Some of her orthographic conventions have become deﬁnitely archaic, such as her spelling of ‘connexion’ and ‘shew’. These we have replaced by contemporary orthographic conventions. We have