tation marks (which became uniform in the second half of the twentieth century). His use, and lack of use, of quotation marks is not always systematic. We have for the most part abided by it, since it is usually perfectly clear. But in a couple of places it renders a passage almost unintelligible, and there we have changed it (e.g. §458, see end- note). We have by and large not followed his practice of employing both question mark and exclamation mark at the end of an interrogative sen- tence that is surprising or especially emphatic. For reasons that should be obvious from case to case, we have sometimes added italics and some- times removed italics from Anscombe’s translation. There are various quotations, references and allusions in Wittgenstein’s text. These we have attempted to identify. But, not wanting to clutter up his text with footnotes, we have relegated these identiﬁcations to the endnotes. It is there too that we have explained, where we could, the import of Wittgenstein’s occasional double-brack- eted notes to himself. Our primary use of endnotes, however, is to explain our differences with Anscombe’s translation, where they do not speak for themselves. All endnotes are indicated by a marginal asterisk adja- cent to the relevant remark or paragraph within a remark. The Text of the Philosophische Untersuchungen In his Preface, dated January 1945 (prior to the composition of the ﬁnal draft of the Investigations in 1945–6), Wittgenstein wrote that the book consists of the precipitate of his work over the previous sixteen years. He had returned to Cambridge, and to philosophy, in January 1929. His ﬁrst attempt to compose a book which would present his new thoughts was The Big Typescript (TS 213), a 768-page untitled type- script, with an eight-page annotated table of contents, dictated in 1933. This was based on his MSS Volumes I–X (MSS 105–114) written between 1929 and 1932. No sooner was the dictation completed than Wittgenstein started to amend it extensively, ﬁrst by manuscript addi- tions written on the typescript, and then by attempts at rewriting the material in fresh manuscripts. The ﬁrst revision (‘Umarbeitung’) is in MSS Volumes X and XI (MSS 114 and 115) written in late 1933 and early 1934. This too was unsatisfactory, and Wittgenstein immediately embarked on a second revision (the ‘Zweite Umarbeitung’) in MS 140 (known as the ‘Grosses Format’). However, after writing 39 pages  of this, he abandoned it too. Thereafter, The Big Typescript was used primarily as a store from which remarks could be selected for use  elsewhere. The second attempt at composing a book took place in Norway in  the autumn of 1936. In the academic year of 1934–5 in Cambridge, Wittgenstein had dictated the Brown Book to Alice Ambrose and Francis Skinner. In August 1936, he travelled to Norway with the inten- tion of continuing his philosophical work in solitude in his small house in Skjolden. At the end of August, he began translating the English  text of the Brown Book into German in MS 115 (Volume XI),  pp. 118–292, under the title ‘Philosophische Untersuchungen, Versuch einer Umarbeitung’ (‘Philosophical Investigations, Attempted Revision’), revising it as he was going along. But in early November he gave up, The Text of the Philosophische Untersuchungen xix writing on page 292 of the MS volume ‘This whole “attempted revi- sion” from page 118 to here is worthless.’ He immediately began a new endeavour in MS 142 a the ﬁrst, pre- war, version of the Philosophical Investigations, which corresponds roughly to §§1–189(a) of the published book. This is a 167-page manuscript, written as consecutive paragraphed prose, with the title Philosophische Untersuchungen (Philosophical Investigations). It was  compiled during two separate periods. Pages 1–76 were probably  written between early November and early December 1936, after which Wittgenstein left Norway to spend Christmas with his family  in Vienna. Pages 77–167 were presumably composed after his return to Skjolden between February and May 1937, when he left Skjolden for Britain. This manuscript material was typed in two instalments later in 1937, producing the 137-page typescript TS 220. Wittgenstein returned to Skjolden in mid-August 1937 and began work-