also favoured colloquial compression, as in ‘I’m’, ‘I’ll’, ‘he’d’, ‘we’d’, ‘isn’t’, ‘aren’t’, ‘won’t’ and ‘wouldn’t’, rather more than Anscombe, in order to bring out the conversational tone of the writing. She was meticu- lous in her use of ‘shall’ and ‘will’, and ‘should’ and ‘would’, but time has eroded these distinctions, and we have tried to conform to current usage. In the changes we have introduced to the ﬁrst 107 remarks of the Investigations, we have paid careful attention to Wittgenstein’s responses to Rush Rhees’s translation of 1938–9 (TS 226). Wittgenstein went over Rhees’s often imperfect draft carefully, together with Yorick Smythies, and he made numerous changes and corrections on the typescript by hand. To be sure, he was not a native English speaker, and not all of his corrections are improvements. But where he changed a translation that was subsequently used also by Anscombe, his proposal always  merits close attention. Moreover, many of the changes he introduced  make his intentions at that time (1939) clear, and the fact that he did not change some of Rhees’s translation where it differs importantly  in meaning from Anscombe’s is always noteworthy. Some of the substantive changes we have introduced into the trans- lation are systematic. Anscombe had a marked preference for minimizing the use of the third-person impersonal pronoun ‘one’, often translating Wittgenstein’s use of the German word man by the second-person pro- noun ‘you’. This made the text appear to be more of a conversation with the reader than it actually is. We have throughout respected Wittgenstein’s choice of pronominal form. Anscombe translated seltsam and merkwürdig by ‘queer’. We have translated seltsam by ‘odd’, ‘strange’ or ‘curious’, and merkwürdig by ‘remarkable’, ‘strange’, ‘curious’ or ‘extraordinary’. Wittgenstein’s use of Erklärung (‘explanation’) and Deﬁnition (‘deﬁnition’) was not always respected in Anscombe’s trans- lation, but we have kept to Wittgenstein’s choice of words. So too, his choice of Sinn in some contexts and Bedeutung in others was not observed in the translation, but we have abided by Wittgenstein’s preferences. Hence, where he speaks of ‘“primäre” und “sekundäre” Bedeutung’ (PPF §276; p. 216(d) in the ﬁrst two editions), we have translated ‘“primary” and “secondary” meaning’ rather than Anscombe’s ‘“primary” and  xiv Editorial Preface to the Fourth Edition “secondary” sense’. Anscombe was not consistent in her translation of Gebrauch, Verwendung and Anwendung. We have translated Gebrauch by ‘use’, Verwendung by ‘use’ or ‘employment’, and Anwendung by ‘appli- cation’. ‘Use’ also does service for benützen. In general, however, we have not allowed ourselves to be hidebound by the multiple occurrence of the same German word or phrase in different contexts. It by no means requires always translating by the same English expression, but rather depends on the exigencies of the context and the author’s intention. So, for example, we have translated Praxis der Sprache in Investigations §21 by ‘linguistic practice’ rather than by the more ponderous ‘prac- tice of the language’, and Praxis des Spiels in §54(b) as ‘the way the game is played’, because this is how Wittgenstein wanted it translated. Some German words that Wittgenstein employs are problematic for any translator. So, for example, his use of Satz has no obvious English equivalent, and choices have to be made between ‘sentence’, ‘proposi- tion’, and even ‘remark’. So, for example, in Investigations §§134–5 the German has Satz throughout, but it would be infelicitous to translate the word by ‘sentence’ in all its occurrences here. In many cases, we have gone along with Anscombe’s choice between ‘sentence’ and ‘proposition’, but not in all. For example, in §105(a) Wittgenstein wrote ‘Wenn wir glauben, jene Ordnung, das Ideal, in der wirklichen Sprache ﬁnden zu müssen, werden wir nun mit dem unzufrieden,  was man im gewöhnlichen Leben “Satz”, “Wort”, “Zeichen” nennt.’ Anscombe translated the latter clause by ‘We become dissatisﬁed with what are ordinarily called “propositions”, “words”, “signs”.’ But