men, als ruhten diese Antworten auf falscher Grundlage. a Anders aber, wenn er sagt, der Gegenstand komme ihm manchmal ﬂach, manchmal räumlich vor. 242. Es erzählt mir Einer: “Ich sah die Blume an, dachte aber an etwas anderes und war mir ihrer Farbe nicht bewußt.” Versteh ich das? a Ich kann mir einen sinnvollen Zusammenhang dazu denken; es würde etwa weitergehen: “Dann plötzlich sah ich sie und erkannte, daß es die war, welche . . .” Oder auch: “Hätte ich mich damals abgewandt, ich hätte nicht sagen können, welche Farbe sie hatte.” “Er blickte sie an, ohne sie zu sehen.” a Das gibt’s. Aber was ist das Kriterium dafür? a Es gibt da eben verschiedenerlei Fälle. Philosophy of Psychology a A Fragment xi 222e 238. There is a physiognomy in the aspect, which then fades away. It is almost as if there were a face there which at ﬁrst I imitate, and then accept without imitating it. a And isn’t this really explanation enough? a But isn’t it too much? 239. “I noticed the likeness between him and his father for a few min- utes, and then no longer.” a One might say this if his face were chang- ing, and only looked like his father’s for a short time. But it can also mean that, after a few minutes, I stopped being struck by the likeness. 240. “Once the likeness had struck you, how long were you conscious of it?” How might one answer this question? —– “I soon stopped think- ing about it”, or “It struck me again from time to time”, or “‘I sev- eral times had the thought, how like they are!”, or “I marvelled at the likeness for at least a minute.” —– This is more or less what the answers would look like. 241. I’d like to put the question: “Am I conscious of the three- dimensionality, the depth of an object (of this cupboard, for instance), the whole time I see it?” Do I, so to speak, feel it the whole time? |211| —– But put the question in the third person. a When would you say of someone that he was conscious of it the whole time? and when the opposite? a Of course, one could ask him a but how did he learn  how to answer such a question? —– He knows what it means “to feel pain continuously”. But that will only confuse him here (as it con- fuses me). If he now says that he is continuously conscious of the depth a do I believe him? And if he says that he is conscious of it only from time to time (for example, when talking about it) a do I believe that? These answers will strike me as resting on a false foundation. a It will be dif- ferent if he says that the object sometimes seems to him ﬂat, sometimes three-dimensional. 242. Someone tells me: “I looked at the ﬂower, but was thinking of some- thing else and was not conscious of its colour.” Do I understand this? a I can imagine a signiﬁcant context, say his going on: “Then I sud- denly saw it, and realized it was the colour which . . .” Or again: “If I had turned away then, I could not have said what colour it was.” “He looked at it without seeing it.” a There is such a thing. But what is the criterion for it? a Well, there is a variety of cases here. 223 Philosophie der Psychologie a Ein Fragment xi 243. “Ich habe jetzt mehr auf die Form, als auf die Farbe geschaut.” Laß dich durch solche Wendungen des Ausdrucks nicht verwirren. Vor allem, denk nicht “Was mag da wohl im Aug, oder im Gehirn vor sich gehen?” 244. Die Ähnlichkeit fällt mir auf, und das Auffallen erlischt. Sie ﬁel mir nur für wenige Minuten auf, dann nicht mehr. Was geschah da? a Wessen kann ich mich entsinnen? Mein eigener Gesichtsausdruck kommt mir in den Sinn, ich könnte ihn nachmachen. Hätte Einer, der mich kennt, mein Gesicht gesehen, er hätte gesagt: “Es ist dir jetzt etwas an seinem Gesicht aufgefallen.” a Auch fällt mir ein, was ich bei so einer Gelegenheit etwa hörbar, oder nur in mir selbst,