also der Sprache, ist. Was allen diesen Vorgängen gemeinsam ist und sie zur Sprache, oder zu Teilen der Sprache macht. Du schenkst dir also gerade den Teil der Untersuchung, der dir selbst seinerzeit das meiste Kopfzerbrechen gemacht hat, nämlich den, die allgemeine Form des Satzes und der Sprache betreffend.” Und das ist wahr. a Statt etwas anzugeben, was allem, was wir Sprache nennen, gemeinsam ist, sage ich, es ist diesen Erscheinungen gar nicht Eines gemeinsam, weswegen wir für alle das gleiche Wort verwenden, a sondern sie sind mit einander in vielen verschiedenen Weisen verwandt. Und dieser Verwandtschaft, oder dieser Verwandtschaften wegen nen- nen wir sie alle “Sprachen”. Ich will versuchen, dies zu erklären. Philosophical Investigations 35e so too. a But it is not clear everywhere what should be called the ‘point’ of an order. (Similarly, one may say of certain objects that they have this or that purpose. The essential thing is that this is a lamp, that it serves to give light —– what is not essential is that it is an ornament to the room, ﬁlls an empty space, and so on. But there is not always a clear boundary between essential and inessential.) 63. To say, however, that a sentence in (b) is an ‘analysed’ form of one in (a) readily seduces us into thinking that the former is the more fun- damental form, that it alone shows what is meant by the other, and so on. We may think: someone who has only the unanalysed form lacks the analysis; but he who knows the analysed form |31| has got it all. a But can’t I say that an aspect of the matter is lost to the latter no less than to the former? 64. Let’s imagine language-game (48) altered so that names signify  not monochrome squares but rectangles each consisting of two such squares. Let such a rectangle which is half red, half green, be called “U”; a half green, half white one “V”; and so on. Could we not  imagine people who had names for such combinations of colour, but not for the individual colours? Think of cases where we say, “This arrangement of colours (say the French tricolor) has a quite special  character”. In what way do the symbols of this language-game stand in need  of analysis? How far is it even possible to replace this game by (48)? a It is just a different language-game; even though it is related to (48). 65. Here we come up against the great question that lies behind all these considerations. a For someone might object against me: “You make things easy for yourself! You talk about all sorts of language-games, but have nowhere said what is essential to a language-game, and so to language: what is common to all these activities, and makes them into language or parts of language. So you let yourself off the very part of the investigation that once gave you the most headache, the part about the general form of the proposition and of language.” And this is true. a Instead of pointing out something common to all that we call language, I’m saying that these phenomena have no one thing in common in virtue of which we use the same word for all a but there are many different kinds of afﬁnity between them. And on account of this afﬁnity, or these afﬁnities, we call them all “languages”. I’ll try to explain this. * 36 Philosophische Untersuchungen 66. Betrachte z. B. einmal die Vorgänge, die wir “Spiele” nennen. Ich meine Brettspiele, Kartenspiele, Ballspiele, Kampfspiele, u. s. w. Was ist allen diesen gemeinsam? a Sag nicht: “Es muß ihnen etwas gemeinsam sein, sonst hießen sie nicht ‘Spiele’” a sondern schau, ob ihnen allen etwas gemeinsam ist. a Denn, wenn du sie anschaust, wirst du zwar nicht etwas sehen, was allen gemeinsam wäre, aber du wirst Ähnlichkeiten, Verwandtschaften, sehen, und zwar eine ganze Reihe. Wie gesagt: denk nicht, sondern schau! a Schau z. B. die Brettspiele an, mit ihren man- nigfachen Verwandtschaften. Nun geh zu den Kartenspielen über: hier ﬁndest du viele Entsprechungen mit jener ersten Klasse, aber viele gemeinsame Züge verschwinden, andere treten auf. Wenn wir nun zu