durch eine der bei uns üblichen Unterrichtsarten gegangen, er hat in diesem Unterricht seine Muttersprache lesen gelernt. Später liest er Bücher, Briefe, die Zeitung, u. a. Was geht nun vor sich, wenn er, z. B., die Zeitung liest? —– Seine Augen gleiten a wie wir sagen a den gedruckten Wörtern entlang, er spricht sie aus, a oder sagt sie nur zu sich selbst; und zwar gewisse Wörter, indem er ihre Druckform als Ganzes erfaßt, andere, nachdem sein Aug die ersten Silben erfaßt hat, einige wieder liest er Silbe für Silbe, und das eine oder andre vielleicht Buchstabe für Buchstabe. a Wir wür- den auch sagen, er habe einen Satz gelesen, wenn er während des Lesens weder laut noch zu sich selbst spricht, aber danach imstande ist, den Satz wörtlich oder annähernd wiederzugeben. a Er kann auf das achten, was er liest, oder auch a wie wir sagen könnten a als bloße Lesemaschine funktionieren, ich meine, laut und richtig lesen, ohne auf das, was er liest, zu achten; vielleicht während seine Aufmerksamkeit auf etwas ganz anderes gerichtet ist (so daß er nicht imstande ist, zu sagen, was er gelesen hat, wenn man ihn gleich darauf fragt). Philosophical Investigations 67e In the sense in which there are processes (including mental pro- cesses) which are characteristic of understanding, understanding is not a mental process. (A pain’s increasing or decreasing, listening to a tune or a sentence a mental processes.) 155. So, what I wanted to say was: if he suddenly knew how to go on, if he understood the system, then he may have had a distinctive expe- rience a and if he is asked: “What was it? What took place when you suddenly grasped the system?”, perhaps he will describe it much as we described it above —– but for us it is the circumstances under which he had such an experience that warrant him saying in such a case that he understands, that he knows how to go on. 156. This will become clearer if we interpolate an examination of another word: namely, “reading”. First I must note that I’m not count- ing the understanding of what is read as part of ‘reading’ for purposes of this examination: reading is here the activity of rendering out loud what is written or printed; but also of writing from dictation, copying something printed, playing from sheet music, and so on. The use of this word in the circumstances of our ordinary life is  of course extremely familiar to us. But the part the word plays in  our life, and so too the language-game in which we employ it, would be difﬁcult to describe even in rough outline. A person, let’s say an Englishman, has received at school or at home one of the kinds of instruc- tion usual among us, and in the course of it has learned to read  his native language. Later he reads books, letters, newspapers, and so forth. Now what goes on when, say, he reads a newspaper? —– His  eye passes a as we say a along the printed words; he says them out loud a or only to himself; that is, he reads certain words by taking  in their printed shapes as wholes, others when his eye has taken in  the ﬁrst syllables; others again he reads syllable by syllable, and an  occasional one perhaps letter by letter. a We would also say that he had read a sentence if he spoke neither aloud nor to himself during  the reading, but was afterwards able to repeat the sentence word for word or nearly so. a He may attend to what he reads, or again a as we |62| might put it a function as a mere reading-machine: I mean, read aloud and correctly without attending to what he is reading; perhaps with his attention on something quite different (so that he is unable  to say what he has been reading if he is asked about it immediately afterwards). 68 Philosophische Untersuchungen Vergleiche nun mit diesem Leser einen Anfänger. Er liest die Wörter, indem er sie mühsam buchstabiert. a Einige Wörter aber errät er aus dem Zusammenhang; oder er weiß das Lesestück vielleicht zum Teil schon auswendig. Der Lehrer sagt dann, daß er die Wörter nicht wirklich liest (und in gewissen Fällen, daß er nur vorgibt, sie zu lesen). Wenn wir an dieses Lesen, an das Lesen des Anfängers, denken und