uttering it? Of course you know this language a which contains those other sentences as well a but is this knowing something that ‘happens’  while you are uttering the sentence? a And I have conceded that the foreigner, who conceives the sentence differently, will probably also pro- nounce it differently; but what we call his wrong conception does  not have to lie in anything that accompanies the utterance of the  command. |10| The sentence is ‘elliptical’, not because it leaves out something that we mean when we utter it, but because it is shortened a in compari- son with a particular paradigm of our grammar. a Of course someone might object here: “You grant that the shortened and the unshortened sentence have the same sense. a What is this sense, then? Isn’t there a verbal expression for this sense?” —– But doesn’t their having the same sense consist in their having the same use? a (In Russian one says “Stone red” instead of “The stone is red”. Does the sense they grasp lack the copula? Or do they add the copula in thought?) 21. Imagine a language-game in which A asks, and B reports, the num- ber of slabs or blocks in a pile, or the colours and shapes of the build- ing stones that are stacked in such-and-such a place. a Such a report might run: “Five slabs.” Now what is the difference between the report or assertion “Five slabs” and the order “Five slabs!”? a Well, it is the part which uttering these words plays in the language-game. But the tone of voice in which they are uttered is likely to be different too, as are the facial expression and some other things. But we could also ima- gine the tone’s being the same a for an order and a report can be  spoken in a variety of tones of voice and with various facial expressions a the difference being only in the use that is made of these words. (Of course, we might also use the words “assertion” and “command” to signify a grammatical form of a sentence and a particular intonation; just as we would call the sentence “Isn’t the weather glorious to-day?” a question, although it is used as an assertion.) We could imagine a lan- guage in which all assertions had the form and tone of rhetorical ques- tions; or every command had the form of the question “Would you like to . . . ?”. Perhaps it will then be said: “What he says has the form of a question but is really a command” a that is, has the function of a command in linguistic practice. (Similarly, one says “You will do this” not as a prophecy, but as a command. What makes it the one or the other?) * 14 Philosophische Untersuchungen 22. Freges Ansicht, daß in einer Behauptung eine Annahme steckt, die dasjenige ist, was behauptet wird, basiert eigentlich auf der Möglichkeit, die es in unserer Sprache gibt, jeden Behauptungssatz in der Form zu schreiben “Es wird behauptet, daß das und das der Fall ist”. a Aber “daß das und das der Fall ist” ist eben in unsrer Sprache kein Satz a es ist noch kein Zug im Sprachspiel. Und schreibe ich statt “Es wird behauptet, daß . . .” “Es wird behauptet: das und das ist der Fall”, dann sind hier die Worte “Es wird behauptet” eben überﬂüssig. Wir könnten sehr gut auch jede Behauptung in der Form einer Frage mit nachgesetzter Bejahung schreiben; etwa: “Regnet es? Ja!”. Würde das zeigen, daß in jeder Behauptung eine Frage steckt? Man hat wohl das Recht, ein Behauptungszeichen zu verwenden im Gegensatz z. B. zu einem Fragezeichen; oder wenn man eine Behauptung unterscheiden will von einer Fiktion, oder einer Annahme. Irrig ist es nur, wenn man meint, daß die Behauptung nun aus zwei Akten besteht, dem Erwägen und dem Behaupten (Beilegen des Wahrheitswerts, oder dergl.) und daß wir diese Akte nach den Zeichen des Satzes vollziehen, ungefähr wie wir nach Noten singen. Mit dem Singen nach Noten ist allerdings das laute, oder leise Lesen des geschriebenen Satzes zu  vergleichen, aber nicht das ‘Meinen’ (Denken) des gelesenen Satzes. Das Fregesche Behauptungszeichen betont den Satzanfang. Es hat also