342. William James, um zu zeigen, daß Denken ohne Sprechen möglich ist, zitiert die Erinnerung eines Taubstummen, Mr. Ballard, welcher schreibt, er habe in seiner frühen Jugend, noch ehe er sprechen konnte, sich über Gott und die Welt Gedanken gemacht. a Was das wohl heißen mag! a Ballard schreibt: “It was during those delightful rides, some two or three years before my initiation into the rudiments of written lan- guage, that I began to ask myself the question: how came the world into being?” a Bist du sicher, daß dies die richtige Übersetzung deiner wortlosen Gedanken in Worte ist? a möchte man fragen. Und warum reckt diese Frage a die doch sonst gar nicht zu existieren scheint a hier ihren Kopf hervor? Will ich sagen, es täusche den Schreiber sein Gedächtnis? a Ich weiß nicht einmal, ob ich das sagen würde. Diese Erinnerungen sind ein seltsames Gedächtnisphänomen a und ich weiß nicht, welche Schlüsse auf die Vergangenheit des Erzählers man aus ihnen ziehen kann! Philosophical Investigations 116e And when one thinks about this, the mind reaches for the idea of dancing, speaking, etc. 339. Thinking is not an incorporeal process which lends life and sense to speaking, and which it would be possible to detach from speaking, rather as the Devil took the shadow of Schlemihl from the ground. —– But in what way “not an incorporeal process”? Am I acquainted with incorporeal processes, then, only thinking is not one of them? No; in my predicament, I helped myself to the expression “an incorporeal pro- cess” as I was trying to explain the meaning of the word “thinking” in a primitive way. One could, however, say “Thinking is an incorporeal process” if one were using this to distinguish the grammar of the word “think” from that of, say, the word “eat”. Only that makes the difference between the meanings look too slight. (It is like saying: numerals are actual,  and numbers are non-actual objects.) An inappropriate expression is  a sure means of remaining stuck in confusion. It, as it were, bars the way out. 340. One cannot guess how a word functions. One has to look at its application and learn from that. But the difﬁculty is to remove the prejudice which stands in the way of doing so. It is not a stupid prejudice. 341. Speech with and without thought is to be compared to playing a piece of music with and without thought. 342. William James, in order to show that thought is possible without speech, quotes the reminiscences of a deaf-mute, Mr Ballard, who wrote that in his early youth, even before he could speak, he had had thoughts about God and the world. a What could that mean!? a Ballard writes: “It was during those delightful rides, some two or three years before my initiation into the rudiments of written language, that I began to ask myself the question: how came the world into being?” a Are you sure a one would like to ask a that this is the correct translation of your wordless thoughts into words? And why does this question a which otherwise seems not to exist a arise here? Do I want to say that the writer’s memory deceives |110| him? a I don’t even know if I’d say that. These recollections are a strange memory phenomenon a and I don’t know what conclusions one can draw from them about the nar- rator’s past! * * * 117 Philosophische Untersuchungen 343. Die Worte, mit denen ich meine Erinnerung ausdrücke, sind meine Erinnerungsreaktion. 344. Wäre es denkbar, daß Menschen nie eine hörbare Sprache sprächen, wohl aber eine im Innern, in der Vorstellung, zu sich selber? “Wenn die Menschen immer nur in ihrem Innern zu sich selbst sprächen, so täten sie schließlich nur dasjenige beständig, was sie auch heute manchmal tun.” a Es ist also ganz leicht, sich dies vorzustellen; man braucht nur den leichten Übergang von Einigen zu Allen zu machen. (Ähnlich: “Eine unendlich lange Baumreihe ist einfach eine, die nicht zu einem Ende kommt.”) Unser Kriterium dafür, daß Einer zu sich selbst spricht, ist das, was er uns sagt, und sein übriges Verhalten; und wir sagen nur von dem, er spräche zu sich selbst, der, im gewöhnlichen