Philosophical Investigations 128e none of a ‘having’ a nor of a subject, nor therefore of the I either”? Couldn’t I ask: In what sense have you got what you are talking about and saying that only you have got it? Do you possess it? You do not even see it. Don’t you really have to say that no one has got it? And indeed, it’s clear: if you logically exclude other people’s having some- thing, it loses its sense to say that you have it. But what are you then talking about? It’s true I said that I knew deep down what you meant. But that meant that I knew how one thinks to conceive this object, to see it, to gesture at it, as it were, by looking and pointing. I know how one stares ahead and looks about |121| one in this case a and the rest. I think one can say: you are talking (if, for example, you are sitting in a room) of the ‘visual room’. That which has no owner is the ‘visual room’. I can as little own it as I can walk about it, or look at it, or point at it. In so far as it cannot belong to anyone else, it doesn’t belong to me either. Or again, in so far as I want to apply the same form of expression to it as to the material room in which I sit, it doesn’t belong to me. Its description need not mention an owner. Indeed, it need not have an owner. But then the visual room cannot have an owner. “For” a one might say a “it has no master out- side it, and none inside it either.” Think of a picture of a landscape, an imaginary landscape with a house in it. a Someone asks “Whose house is that?” a The answer, by the way, might be “It belongs to the farmer who is sitting on the bench in front of it”. But then he cannot, for example, step into his house. 399. One could also say: surely the owner of the visual room has  to be of the same nature as it; but he isn’t inside it, and there is no  outside. 400. The visual room seemed like a discovery, as it were; but what  its discoverer really found was a new way of speaking, a new comparison, and, one could even say, a new experience. 401. You interpret the new conception as the seeing of a new object. You interpret a grammatical movement that you have made as a quasi- physical phenomenon which you are observing. (Remember, for exam- ple, the question “Are sense-data the stuff of which the universe is made?”) But my expression “You have made a ‘grammatical’ movement” is not unobjectionable. Above all, you have found a new conception. As if you had invented a new way of painting; or, again, a new metre, or a new kind of song. a * 129 Philosophische Untersuchungen 402. “Ich sage zwar ‘Ich habe jetzt die und die Vorstellung’, aber die Worte ‘ich habe’ sind nur ein Zeichen für den Andern; die Vorstellungswelt ist ganz in der Beschreibung der Vorstellung dargestellt.” a Du meinst: das “Ich habe” ist wie ein “Jetzt Achtung!” Du bist geneigt, zu sagen, es sollte eigentlich anders ausgedrückt werden. Etwa einfach, indem man mit der Hand ein Zeichen gibt und dann beschreibt. a Wenn man, wie hier, mit den Ausdrücken unsrer gewöhnlichen Sprache (die doch ihre Schuldigkeit tun) nicht einverstanden ist, so sitzt uns ein Bild im Kopf, das mit dem der gewöhnlichen Ausdrucksweise streitet. Während wir versucht sind, zu sagen, unsre Ausdrucksweise beschreibe die Tatsachen nicht so, wie sie wirklich sind. Als ob (z. B.) der Satz “Er hat Schmerzen” noch auf andre Weise falsch sein könnte, als dadurch, daß dieser Mensch nicht Schmerzen hat. Als sage die Ausdrucksform etwas Falsches, auch wenn der Satz, zur Not, etwas Richtiges behauptet. Denn so sehen ja die Streitigkeiten zwischen Idealisten, Solipsisten und Realisten aus. Die Einen greifen die normale Ausdrucksform an, so als griffen sie eine Behauptung an; die Andern verteidigen sie, als konstatierten sie Tatsachen, die jeder vernünftige Mensch anerkennt. 403. Wenn ich das Wort “Schmerz” ganz für dasjenige in Anspruch nähme, was ich bis dahin “meinen Schmerz” genannt habe, und was