See letter to Rhees 13 June 1945 (letter no. 328 in B. F. McGuinness (ed.), Wittgenstein in Cambridge b Letters and Documents 1911–51 (Blackwell, Oxford, 2008), p. 377). The Text of the Philosophische Untersuchungen xxi into the ﬁnal draft of the Investigations. The latter (TS 227) was prob- ably dictated in the course of the academic year 1945–6. The Interme- diate Draft had been 195 pages long; the ﬁnal typescript is 324 pages long. The ﬁnal typescript contains no remarks the manuscript sources of which post-date June 1945. But Wittgenstein made minor handwritten alterations to the typescript over the next few years. He also added the slips that were cut from typescripts or scribbled on notes, which were probably meant to be taken into account in further revisions of the  text. On some he indicated their intended location. These notes, mostly printed in previous editions at the bottom of a given page5 and referred to as Randbemerkungen, are printed in this edition in boxes placed, wherever possible, in their designated location. The task of publishing the Philosophical Investigations fell to two  of Wittgenstein’s three literary executors, Elizabeth Anscombe and  Rush Rhees. Three typescripts of the Investigations were found among Wittgenstein’s papers after his death in April 1951. His manuscript modiﬁcations to one of the carbon copies were transcribed by various hands into the other two copies, and the original corrected copy was sent to the publisher Basil Blackwell, who produced the ﬁrst edition from it in 1953. Unfortunately, sometime after publication, the original cor- rected copy was lost. Among Wittgenstein’s papers, the editors found a typescript based on manuscript MS 144. This was a collection of 372 unnumbered remarks selected mostly from manuscripts written between May 1946 and May 1949. Anscombe and Rhees decided that this typescript was part of the same book as the 693 numbered remarks which they called ‘Part I’. Indeed, in the editorial note to their edition, they remarked that ‘If Wittgenstein had published his work himself, he would have sup- pressed a good deal of what is in the last 30 pages or so of Part I and worked what is in Part II, with further material, into its place.’ Accordingly, they published the typescript of MS 144 (TS 234) as Part II of the Philosophical Investigations. Unfortunately, that typescript, from which the text was printed, has been lost. 5 There are two exceptions. One is the boxed remark after §108, consisting of three paragraphs. In the Anscombe–Rhees editions these were incorporated in §108 as para- graphs (b)–(d). The other is the boxed remark after §133, previously printed as §133(d) without indicating that it is an added slip cut from TS 228, §140. xxii The Text of the Philosophische Untersuchungen There is no written evidence in Wittgenstein’s Nachlass or cor- respondence to suggest that MS 144 was intended to collect together materials that would be incorporated into the Philosophical Investiga- tions. Nor is there any indication that he intended to suppress ‘a good deal of what is in the last thirty pages or so of Part I’. One question that arises in this connection is the date when he might have made this remark to Anscombe and Rhees. G. H. von Wright, the third of Wittgenstein’s literary executors, conjectured that it was probably when they visited Wittgenstein in Dublin in December 1948.6 At that time a major part of what was collected in MS 144 had been written in much more extensive manuscript volumes (MS 137 and MS 138). But neither MS 144 nor, of course, the subsequent typescript TS 234, had been compiled. It may well have been that at this stage Wittgenstein contemplated revising the last 30 pages of his book, and intended to use some of the large amount of material that he had written since 1946 in the process. But he never carried out any such intentions, and we do not know whether he continued to intend to change the book in this radical way. What we do know is that he compiled MS 144 and dic- tated it to, or had it typed by, a typist in late June and early July 1949. It may well be that this was done at least in part in order to show his friend Norman Malcolm his current work in philosophy of psychology when he visited Malcolm at Cornell in late July 1949. We also know that when he visited Malcolm he said that if he had the money he thought he would have his book (TS 227, the