sagen, A wisse, daß er nicht liest, und er empﬁnde, während er zu lesen Philosophical Investigations 69e question makes no sense here. Unless, indeed, we stipulate: “The ﬁrst word that a person ‘reads’ is the ﬁrst word of the ﬁrst series of 50 words that he reads correctly” (or something of the sort). If, on the other hand, we use “reading” to stand for a certain expe- rience of transition from marks to spoken sounds, then it certainly makes sense to speak of the ﬁrst word that he really read. He can then say, for example, “At this word, for the ﬁrst time, I had the feeling: ‘now I am reading’.” Or again, in the different case of a reading-machine which translated marks into sounds, perhaps as a pianola does, it would be possible to say: “The machine read only after such-and-such had happened to it a after such-and-such parts had been connected by wires; the ﬁrst word that it read was . . .” But in the case of the live reading-machine, “reading” meant:  reacting to written signs in such-and-such ways. So this concept was quite independent of that of a mental or other mechanism. a Nor can the teacher here say of the trainee, “Perhaps he was already reading when he said that word”. For there is no doubt about what he did.  a The change when the pupil began to read was a change in his behaviour; and it makes no sense here to speak of ‘a ﬁrst word in  his new state’. 158. But isn’t that only because of our too slight acquaintance with what goes on in the brain and the nervous system? If we had a more accu- rate knowledge of these things, we would see what connections were established by the training, and then when we looked into his brain, we would be able to say: “Now he has read this word, now the read- ing connection has been set up.” —– And it presumably must be like that a for otherwise how could we be so sure that there was such a connection? That it is so is presumably a priori a or is it only probable? And how probable is it? Now, ask yourself: what do you know about these things? —– But if it is a priori, that means that it is a form of representation which is very appealing to us. 159. But when we think the matter over, we’re tempted to say: the one real criterion for anybody’s reading is the conscious act of reading, the act of reading the sounds off from the letters. “A man |64| surely knows whether he is reading or only pretending to read!” a Suppose A wants to make B believe that he can read Cyrillic script. He learns a Russian sentence by heart and utters it while looking at the printed words as  if he were reading them. Here we’ll surely say that A knows he is not 70 Philosophische Untersuchungen vorgibt, eben dies. Denn es gibt natürlich eine Menge für das Lesen eines Satzes im Druck mehr oder weniger charakteristische Empﬁndungen; es ist nicht schwer, sich solche ins Gedächtnis zu rufen: denke an Empﬁn- dungen des Stockens, genauern Hinsehens, Verlesens, der größeren und geringeren Geläuﬁgkeit der Wortfolgen, u. a. Und ebenso gibt es charakteristische Empﬁndungen für das Aufsagen von etwas Auswendig- gelerntem. Und A wird in unserm Fall keine von den Empﬁndungen haben, die für das Lesen charakteristisch sind, und er wird etwa eine Reihe von Empﬁndungen haben, die für das Schwindeln charakteristisch sind. 160. Denke dir aber diesen Fall: Wir geben Einem, der ﬂießend lesen kann, einen Text zu lesen, den er nie zuvor gesehen hat. Er liest ihn uns vor a aber mit der Empﬁndung, als sage er etwas Auswendiggelerntes (dies könnte die Wirkung irgendeines Giftes sein). Würden wir in einem solchen Falle sagen, er lese das Stück nicht wirklich? Würden wir hier also seine Empﬁndungen als Kriterium dafür gelten lassen, ob er liest oder nicht? Oder aber: Wenn man einem Menschen, der unter dem Einﬂuß eines bestimmten Giftes steht, eine Reihe von Schriftzeichen vorlegt, die keinem existierenden Alphabet anzugehören brauchen, so spreche er nach