denn das Bild eines Blattes aus, das keine bestimmte Form zeigt, son- dern ‘das, was allen Blattformen gemeinsam ist’? Welchen Farbton hat das ‘Muster in meinem Geiste’ der Farbe Grün a dessen, was allen Tönen von Grün gemeinsam ist? “Aber könnte es nicht solche ‘allgemeine’ Muster geben? Etwa ein Blattschema, oder ein Muster von reinem Grün?” a Gewiß! Aber, daß dieses Schema als Schema verstanden wird, und nicht als die Form eines bestimmten Blattes, und daß ein Täfelchen von reinem Grün als Muster alles dessen verstanden wird, was grünlich ist, und nicht als Muster für reines Grün a das liegt wieder in der Art der Anwendung dieser Muster. Frage dich: Welche Gestalt muß das Muster der Farbe Grün haben? Soll es viereckig sein? oder würde es dann das Muster für grüne Vierecke sein? a Soll es also ‘unregelmäßig’ geformt sein? Und was ver- hindert uns, es dann nur als Muster der unregelmäßigen Form anzuse- hen a d. h. zu verwenden? 74. Hierher gehört auch der Gedanke, daß der, welcher dieses Blatt als Muster ‘der Blattform im allgemeinen’ ansieht, es anders sieht, als der, welcher es etwa als Muster für diese bestimmte Form betrachtet. Nun, das könnte ja so sein a obwohl es nicht so ist a, denn es würde nur besagen, daß erfahrungsgemäß der, welcher das Blatt in bestimmter Weise sieht, Philosophical Investigations 39e ‘yellow ochre’.” a This is an explanation that another person will come to understand by looking for, and seeing, what is common to the pic- tures. Then he can look at, can point to, the common feature. Compare with this a case in which I show him ﬁgures of different shapes, all painted the same colour, and say: “What these have in com- mon is called ‘yellow ochre’.” And compare this case: I show him samples of different shades of blue, and say: “The colour that is common to all these is what I call ‘blue’.” 73. When someone explains the names of colours to me by pointing at samples and saying “This colour is called ‘blue’, this ‘green’ . . .”, this case can be compared in many respects to handing me a chart with the words written under the colour samples. a Though this comparison may mislead in various ways. a One is now inclined to extend the com- parison: to have understood the explanation means to have in one’s mind an idea of the thing explained, and that is a sample or picture. So if I’m shown various leaves and told |35| “This is called a ‘leaf’”, I get an idea of the shape of a leaf, a picture of it in my mind. a But what does the picture of a leaf look like when it does not show us any par- ticular shape, but rather ‘what is common to all shapes of leaf’? What shade is the ‘sample in my mind’ of the colour green a the sample of what is common to all shades of green? “But might there not be such ‘general’ samples? Say a schematic leaf, or a sample of pure green?” a Certainly! But for such a schema to be understood as a schema, and not as the shape of a particular leaf, and for a snippet of pure green to be understood as a sample of all that is greenish, and not as a sample of pure green a this in turn resides in the way the samples are applied. Ask yourself, what shape must the sample of the colour green be? Should it be rectangular? Or would it then be the sample of green rect- angles? a So should it be ‘irregular’ in shape? And what is then to pre- vent us from viewing it a that is, from using it a only as a sample of irregularity of shape? 74. Here also belongs the idea that someone who views this leaf as a sample of ‘leaf shape in general’ will see it differently from someone who views it as, say, a sample of this particular shape. Well, this might be so a though it is not so a for it would only amount to saying that, as a matter of experience, someone who sees the leaf in a particular 40 Philosophische Untersuchungen es dann so und so, oder den und den Regeln gemäß, verwendet. Es gibt natürlich ein so und anders Sehen; und es gibt auch Fälle, in denen der,