and its cognates present formidable difﬁculties for the translator, which we have sometimes resolved differently from Anscombe, e.g. §§300–1, 389, 402. xvi Editorial Preface to the Fourth Edition Occasional Anglicisms crept into Wittgenstein’s German. At one point, Anscombe failed to notice his (mis)use of Meinung to signify ‘mean- ing (something)’, translating §639 as ‘One would like to say that an opinion develops’ (which is perfectly accurate) instead of ‘. . . that mean- ing something develops’ (which is surely what Wittgenstein meant (see MS 129, 166f.)). Three recurrent errors run through Anscombe’s translation. First, she commonly mistranslated manch(er, -e, -es): for example, as ‘much of the use of (§7)’ rather than ‘certain uses’, ‘much else besides’ (§21) rather than ‘some other things’, ‘many ways’ (§73) rather than ‘various ways’, ‘a good deal that you will not say’ (§79(d)) rather than ‘some things you won’t say’, ‘many mathematical proofs’ (§517) instead of ‘some math- ematical proofs’, and so on. Second, she apparently misunderstood the usage of wohl, taking it to be more categorical than it is. So, for exam- ple, she translated ‘Aber es wird wohl auch der Ton . . .’ (§21) as ‘No doubt the tone . . .’ where we prefer ‘But probably the tone . . .’; she translated ‘Ähnlich dachte sich wohl Frege die “Annahme”’ (boxed note after §22) as ‘This will be how Frege thought of the “assumption”’ instead of ‘It may well be that this is how . . .’, ‘der wohl nur beim Philosophieren vorkommt’ (§38) as ‘which doubtless only occurs when doing philosophy’, instead of ‘which may well occur only when . . .’; and so on. Finally, there are occasions where the use of the German deﬁnite article der (die, das) should not be translated by a deﬁnite, but by an indeﬁnite article. For example, it is mistaken to translate ‘so nenne ich sie deswegen nicht den Befehl, mich anzustarren etc. . . .’ as ‘I don’t on that account call it the order to stare . . .’ rather than ‘. . . an order to stare’ (§498). Again, the slogan quoted in §560 should not run ‘The meaning of a word is what is explained by the explanation of its meaning’ but rather: ‘The meaning of a word is what an explanation of its mean- ing explains’. And so on. Since in German the indeﬁnite article and the number word ‘one’ are homonyms (ein) Wittgenstein tended to italicize ein when he meant ‘one’ as opposed to ‘a’. Anscombe preserved these italics in translation, but in English such italicization is unnecessary. Wittgenstein’s punctuation was often idiosyncratic. It is, of course, impossible to transfer into English the elaborate punctuation conven- tions of German, let alone all of Wittgenstein’s idiosyncratic additions to it. Anscombe was sparing with her use of punctuation. But Wittgenstein explicitly noted his own preference for heavy punctuation, in order to slow the reader down (MS 136, 128)5, so we have been a 5 See Wittgenstein, Culture and Value, 2nd edn (Blackwell Oxford, 1980), p. 68. Editorial Preface to the Fourth Edition xvii little more liberal in our use of commas than Anscombe. On the  other hand, we have reduced his frequent use of colons before quoted sentences and replaced his colons by commas. We have respected Wittgenstein’s use of short and long dashes, but wherever possible, have avoided following a comma or semi-colon by a dash a which looks uncommonly ugly, preferring to delete one or the other. In some cases, however, we have replaced a pair of short dashes by commas. As in the German text, we have standardized his ‘dots of laziness’, but in con- formity with English convention have added one as a full stop when they occur at the end of a sentence. We have accepted his practice of using double quotation marks to begin a quotation, with single  quotation marks for quotes within quotes. He also used single quota- tion marks as scare-quotes, and this too we have accepted. Wittgenstein wrote before the days of systematic and methodical dif- ferentiation of the use from the mention of a word or phrase by quo-