es auswendig zu wissen”? 5) Jemand fragt mich: “Kannst du dieses Gewicht heben?” Ich antworte “Ja”. Nun sagt er “Tu’s!” a da kann ich es nicht. Unter was für Umständen würde man die Rechtfertigung gelten lassen: “Als ich antwortete ‘Ja’, da konnte ich’s, nur jetzt kann ich’s nicht”? Die Kriterien, die wir für das ‘Passen’, ‘Können’, ‘Verstehen’ gelten lassen, sind viel kompliziertere, als es auf den ersten Blick scheinen möchte. D. h., das Spiel mit diesen Worten, ihre Verwendung im sprachlichen Verkehr, dessen Mittel sie sind, ist verwickelter a die Rolle dieser Wörter in unsrer Sprache eine andere, als wir versucht sind, zu glauben. Philosophical Investigations 79e a Think how we learn to use the expressions “Now I know how to go |73| on”, “Now I can go on”, and others; in what family of language- games we learn their use. We can also imagine the case where nothing at all occurred in  B’s mind except that he suddenly said “Now I know how to go on”  a perhaps with a feeling of relief; and that he did in fact go on work- ing out the series without using the formula. And in this case too  we should say a in certain circumstances a that he did know how to go on. 180. This is how these words are used. It would be quite misleading, in this last case, for instance, to call the words a “description of a men- tal state”. Rather, one could here call them a “signal”; and we judge whether it was rightly applied by what he goes on to do. 181. In order to understand this, we need also to consider the follow- ing: suppose B says he knows how to go on a but when he wants to go on, he hesitates and can’t do it. Are we then to say that it was wrong of him to say he could go on; or rather, that he was able to go on then, only now is not? a Clearly, we shall say different things in different cases. (Consider both kinds of case.) 182. The grammar of “to ﬁt”, “to be able” and “to understand”. Exercises: (1) When is a cylinder C said to ﬁt into a hollow cylinder H? Only as long as C is inside H? (2) Sometimes one says that: C has ceased to ﬁt into H at such-and-such a time. What criteria are used in such a case for its having happened at that time? (3) What does one regard as criteria for a body’s having changed its weight at a particu- lar time, if it was not actually on the balance at that time? (4) Yesterday I knew the poem by heart; today I no longer know it. In what kind of case does it make sense to ask, “When did I stop knowing it by heart?” (5) Someone asks me, “Can you lift this weight?” I answer, “Yes”. Now he says, “Do it!” a and I can’t. In what kind of circumstances would one accept the excuse “When I answered ‘yes’ I could do it, only now I can’t”? The criteria which we accept for ‘ﬁtting’, ‘being able to’, ‘under- standing’, are much more complicated than might appear at ﬁrst sight. That is, the game with these words, their use in the linguistic intercourse that is carried on by their means, is more involved a the role of these words in our language is other than we are tempted to think. 80 Philosophische Untersuchungen (Diese Rolle ist es, die wir verstehen müssen, um philosophische Paradoxe aufzulösen. Und darum genügt dazu gewöhnlich nicht eine Deﬁnition; und schon erst recht nicht die Feststellung, ein Wort sei ‘undeﬁnierbar’.) 183. Wie aber, a hat nun der Satz “Jetzt kann ich fortsetzen” im Fall (151) das Gleiche geheißen, wie “Jetzt ist mir die Formel eingefallen”, oder etwas anderes? Wir können sagen, daß dieser Satz, unter diesen Umständen, den gleichen Sinn habe (das Gleiche leiste) wie jener. Aber auch, daß, allgemein, diese beiden Sätze nicht den gleichen Sinn haben. Wir sagen auch: “Jetzt kann ich fortsetzen, ich meine, ich weiß die Formel”; wie wir sagen: “Ich kann gehen, d. h., ich habe Zeit”; aber