Sprache. Es ist in unserem Spiel ein Paradigma; etwas, womit verglichen wird. Und dies feststellen, kann heißen, eine wichtige Feststellung machen; aber es ist dennoch eine Feststellung unser Sprachspiel a unsere Darstellungsweise a betreffend. 51. In der Beschreibung des Sprachspiels (48) sagte ich, den Farben der Quadrate entsprächen die Wörter “R”, “S”, etc. Worin aber besteht diese Entsprechung; inwiefern kann man sagen, diesen Zeichen entsprächen gewisse Farben der Quadrate? Die Erklärung in (48) stellte ja nur einen Zusammenhang zwischen diesen Zeichen und gewissen Wörtern unserer Sprache her (den Farbnamen). a Nun, es war vorausgesetzt, daß der Gebrauch der Zeichen im Spiel anders, und zwar durch Hinweisen auf Paradigmen, gelehrt würde. Wohl; aber was heißt es nun, zu sagen, in der Praxis der Sprache entsprächen den Zeichen gewisse Elemente? a Liegt es darin, daß der, welcher die Komplexe von Farbquadraten beschreibt, hierbei immer “R” sagt, wo ein rotes Quadrat steht; “S”, wo ein schwarzes steht, etc.? Aber wie, wenn er sich bei  der Beschreibung irrt und, fälschlich, “R” sagt, wo er ein schwarzes Philosophical Investigations 29e destruction of an element, if everything that we call “destruction” lies in the separation of elements. |25| One would like to say, however, that being cannot be attributed to an element, for if it did not exist, one could not even name it, and so one could state nothing at all about it. a But let us consider an ana- logous case. There is one thing of which one can state neither that it is 1 metre long, nor that it is not 1 metre long, and that is the standard metre in Paris. a But this is, of course, not to ascribe any remarkable property to it, but only to mark its peculiar role in the game of mea- suring with a metre-rule. a Suppose that samples of colour were pre- served in Paris like the standard metre. So we explain that “sepia” means the colour of the standard sepia which is kept there hermetically sealed. Then it will make no sense to state of this sample either that it is of this colour or that it is not. We can put it like this: This sample is an instrument of the language, by means of which we make colour statements. In this game, it is not something that is represented, but is a means of representation. a And the same applies to an element in language-game (48) when we give it a name by uttering the word “R” a in so doing we have given that object a role in our language-game; it is now a means of representa- tion. And to say “If it did not exist, it could have no name” is to say as much and as little as: if this thing did not exist, we could not use it in our language-game. a What looks as if it had to exist is part of the language. It is a paradigm in our game; something with which com- parisons are made. And this may be an important observation; but it is none the less an observation about our language-game a our mode of representation. 51. In describing language-game (48), I said that the words “R”, “B”, etc. corresponded to the colours of the squares. But what does this cor- respondence consist in? In what sense can one say that certain colours of squares correspond to these signs? After all, the explanation in (48) merely set up a connection between those signs and certain words of our language (colour names). a Well, it was assumed that the use of the signs in the game would be taught in a different way a by point- ing to paradigms. Very well; but what does it mean to say that in the practice of the language certain elements correspond to the signs? a Is it that the person who is describing the complexes of coloured squares always says “R” where there is a red square, “B” where there is a black one, and so on? But what if he goes wrong in the description and  mistakenly says “R” where he sees a black square —– what is the  30 Philosophische Untersuchungen Quadrat sieht —– was ist hier das Kriterium dafür, daß dies ein Fehler war? a Oder besteht, daß “R” ein rotes Quadrat bezeichnet, darin, daß den Menschen, die die Sprache gebrauchen, immer ein rotes Quadrat