Grammatik des Wortes “glauben” voraus, den gewöhnlichen Gebrauch, den du beherrschst. a Du nimmst nicht einen Stand der Dinge an, der dir, sozusagen, eindeutig durch ein Bild vor Augen steht, so daß du dann eine andere als die gewöhnliche Behauptung an diese Annahme anstückeln kannst. a Du wüßtest gar nicht, was du hier annimmst (d. h., was z. B. aus so einer Annahme folgt), wenn dir nicht schon die Verwendung von “glauben” geläuﬁg wäre. 107. Denk an den Ausdruck “Ich sage . . .”, z. B. in “Ich sage, es  wird heute regnen”, welches einfach der Behauptung “Es wird . . .”  Philosophy of Psychology a A Fragment x 201e 101. “But now, the assertion ‘I believe’ seems not to be the assertion of what the supposition assumes.” a So I am tempted to cast around for a variant ﬁrst person present indicative in the inﬂection of the verb. 102. This is how I’m thinking of it: Believing is a state of mind. It per- sists; and that independently of the process of expressing it in a sen- tence, for example. So it’s a kind of disposition of the believing person. This is revealed to me in the case of someone else by his behaviour; and |192| by his words. And so just as well by the utterance “I believe . . .” as by the simple assertion. a Now what about my own case: how do I myself recognize my own disposition? a Here I would have to be able to do what others do a to attend to myself, listen to myself talk- ing, make inferences from what I say! 103. My attitude to my own words is wholly different from that of  others. I could ﬁnd that variant conjugation of the verb, if only I could say “I seem to believe”. 104. If I listened to the words issuing from my mouth, then I could say that someone else was speaking out of it. 105. “Judging from my words, this is what I believe.” Now, it would be possible to think up circumstances in which this made sense. And then it would also be possible for someone to say “It is raining and I don’t believe it”, or “It seems to me that my ego believes this, but it isn’t true”. One would have to imagine a kind of behaviour sug- gesting that two beings were speaking through my mouth. 106. Even in the assumption, the pattern is not what you think. With the words “Assuming I believe . . .” you are presupposing the whole grammar of the word “to believe”, the ordinary use, which you have mastered. a You are not assuming some state of affairs which, so to speak, a picture presents unambiguously to you, so that you can tack on to this assumption some assertion other than the ordinary one. a You would not know at all what you were assuming here (that is, what, for example, would follow from such an assumption), if you were not already familiar with the use of “believe”. 107. Think of the expression “I say . . .”, for example in “I say it will rain today”, which simply amounts to the same as the assertion “It will 202 Philosophie der Psychologie a Ein Fragment x gleichkommt. “Er sagt, es wird . . .” heißt beiläuﬁg “Er glaubt, es wird . . .”. “Angenommen, ich sage . . .” heißt nicht: Angenommen, es werde heute . . . 108. Verschiedene Begriffe berühren sich hier und laufen ein Stück Wegs miteinander. Man muß eben nicht glauben, daß die Linien alle Kreise seien. 109. Betrachte auch den Unsatz: “Es dürfte regnen; aber es regnet nicht.” Und hier muß man sich hüten, zu sagen: “Es dürfte regnen” heißt eigentlich: ich glaube, es wird regnen. a Warum sollte dann nicht umgekehrt dies jenes heißen? 110. Betrachte nicht die zaghafte Behauptung als Behauptung der Zaghaftigkeit. Philosophy of Psychology a A Fragment x 202e rain today”. “He says it will rain today” means roughly “He believes it will rain today”. “Assuming I say it will rain today” does not mean “Assuming it rains today”.