at an order of the form “+n”; so at the order “+1” he writes |75| down the series of natural numbers. a Let’s suppose we have done exercises, and tested his understanding up to 1000. Then we get the pupil to continue one series (say “+2”) beyond 1000 a and he writes 1000, 1004, 1008, 1012. We say to him, “Look what you’re doing!” a He doesn’t understand. We say, “You should have added two: look how you began the series!” a He answers, “Yes, isn’t it right? I thought that was how I had to do it.” —– Or suppose he pointed to the series and said, “But I did go on in the same way”. a It would now be no use to say, “But can’t you see . . . ?” a and go over the old explanations and examples for him again. In such a case, we might perhaps say: this person ﬁnds it nat- ural, once given our explanations, to understand our order as we would understand the order “Add 2 up to 1000, 4 up to 2000, 6 up to 3000, and so on”. This case would have similarities to that in which it comes naturally to a person to react to the gesture of pointing with the hand by look- ing in the direction from ﬁngertip to wrist, rather than from wrist to ﬁngertip. 186. “What you are saying, then, comes to this: a new insight a intu- ition a is needed at every step to carry out the order ‘+n’ correctly.” a To carry it out correctly! How is it decided what is the right step to take at any particular point? a “The right step is the one that is in accordance with the order a as it was meant.” a So when you gave the order “+2”, you meant that he was to write 1002 after 1000 a and did you then also mean that he should write 1868 after 1866, and 100036 after 100034, and so on a an inﬁnite number of such sentences? a “No; what I meant was, that he should write the next but one number after every number that he wrote; and from this, stage by stage, all those sentences follow.” a But that is just what is in question: what, at any stage, does follow from that sentence. Or, again, what at any stage we are to call “being in accordance” with it (and with how you then meant it a whatever your meaning it may have consisted in). It would almost be more correct to say, not that an intuition was needed at every point, but that a new decision was needed at every point. 187. “But I already knew, at the time when I gave the order, that he should write 1002 after 1000.” a Certainly; and you may even say you 82 Philosophische Untersuchungen sogar sagen, du habest es damals gemeint; nur sollst du dich nicht von der Grammatik der Wörter “wissen” und “meinen” irreführen lassen. Denn du meinst ja nicht, daß du damals an den Übergang von 1000 auf 1002 gedacht hast a und wenn auch an diesen Übergang, so doch an andre nicht. Dein “Ich habe damals schon gewußt . . . ” heißt etwa: “Hätte man mich damals gefragt, welche Zahl er nach 1000 schreiben soll, so hätte ich geantwortet ‘1002’.” Und daran zweiﬂe ich nicht. Es ist das eine Annahme etwa von der Art dieser: “Wenn er damals ins Wasser gefallen wäre, so wäre ich ihm nachgesprungen.” a Worin lag nun das Irrige deiner Idee? 188. Da möchte ich zuerst sagen: Deine Idee sei die gewesen, jenes Meinen des Befehls habe auf seine Weise alle jene Übergänge doch schon gemacht: deine Seele ﬂiege beim Meinen, gleichsam, voraus und mache alle Übergänge, ehe du körperlich bei dem oder jenem angelangt bist. Du warst also zu Ausdrücken geneigt, wie: “Die Übergänge sind eigentlich schon gemacht; auch ehe ich sie schriftlich, mündlich, oder in Gedanken mache.” Und es schien, als wären sie in einer einzigarti- gen Weise vorausbestimmt, antizipiert a wie nur das Meinen die Wirklichkeit antizipieren könne.