der Anzahl der Zeichen Wörter aus, so als wären die Zeichen Buchstaben, und zwar mit allen äußeren Merkmalen und Empﬁndun- gen des Lesens. (Ähnliche Erfahrungen haben wir in Träumen; nach dem Aufwachen sagt man dann etwa: “Es kam mir vor, als läse ich die Zeichen, obwohl es gar keine Zeichen waren.”) In so einem Fall würden Manche geneigt sein, zu sagen, der Mensch lese diese Zeichen. Andere, er lese sie nicht. a Angenommen, er habe auf diese Weise eine Gruppe von vier Zeichen als OBEN gelesen (oder gedeutet) a nun zeigen wir ihm die gleichen Zeichen in umgekehrter Reihenfolge und er liest NEBO, und so behält er in weiteren Versuchen immer die gleiche Deutung der Zeichen bei: hier wären wir wohl geneigt, zu sagen, er lege sich ad hoc ein Alphabet zurecht und lese dann danach. 161. Bedenke nun auch, daß es eine kontinuierliche Reihe von Übergängen gibt zwischen dem Falle, in welchem jemand das auswendig hersagt, was er lesen soll, und dem, in welchem er jedes Wort Buchstabe für Buchstaben liest, ohne jede Hilfe des Erratens aus dem Zusammenhang, oder des Auswendigwissens. Mach diesen Versuch: sag die Zahlenreihe von 1 bis 12. Nun schau auf das Zifferblatt deiner Uhr und lies diese Reihe. a Was hast du in diesem Falle “lesen” genannt? Das heißt: was hast du getan, um es zum Lesen zu machen? Philosophical Investigations 70e reading, and has a sense of just this while pretending to read. For there are, of course, many feelings more or less characteristic of reading a printed sentence; it is not difﬁcult to recall such feelings: think of feel- ings of hesitating, of looking more closerly, of misreading, of words fol- lowing on one another in a more or less familiar fashion, and so on. And equally, there are feelings characteristic of reciting something one has learnt by heart. In our example, A will have none of the feelings that are characteristic of reading, and will perhaps have various feel- ings characteristic of cheating. 160. But imagine the following case: we give someone who can read ﬂuently a text that he has never seen before. He reads it to us a but with the feeling of saying something he has learnt by heart (this might be the effect of some drug). Would we say in such a case that he was not really reading the passage? That is, would we here allow his feel- ings to count as a criterion for his reading or not reading? Or again, suppose that a man who is under the inﬂuence of a cer- tain drug is presented with a series of written signs (which need not belong to any existing alphabet). He utters words corresponding to the number of the signs, as if they were letters, and does so with all the outward characteristics and feelings of reading. (We have experiences like this in dreams; after waking up in such a case, one says perhaps: “It seemed to me as if I were reading signs, though they weren’t really signs at all.”) In such a case, some people would be inclined to say the man was reading those signs. Others, that he was not. a Suppose he has in this way read (or interpreted) a set of ﬁve signs as A B O V E a and now we show him the same signs in the reverse order and  he reads E V O B A; and in further tests he always retains the same interpretation of the signs: here we may well be inclined to say that he was making up an alphabet for himself ad hoc and then reading accordingly. 161. Remember too that there is a continuous series of transitional cases between that in which a person repeats from memory what he is sup- posed to be reading and that in which he spells out every word with- out being helped at all by guessing from the context or knowing by heart. |65| Try this experiment: say the numbers from 1 to 12. Now look at the dial of your watch and read them. a What was it that you called “read- ing” in the latter case? That is to say, what did you do, to make it into reading? 71 Philosophische Untersuchungen 162. Versuchen wir diese Erklärung: Jemand liest, wenn er die Repro-