velops,’ is correct. But it is clear from the MS source (MS 129, 166f.) that what Wittgenstein had in mind was that meaning (something)  develops, evolves or unfolds. His Anglicized misuse of Meinung is quite common (cf. §§186, 666; also MSS 128, 7; 116, 266). §654 ‘as “proto-phenomena”’: a reference to Goethe’s Urphänomen, or ‘primal phenomenon’ a conceived of as bedrock that does not call for explanation (see Goethe, Theory of Colours, tr. C. L. Eastlake (MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1970), §§174–7. Philosophy of Psychology b A Fragment  [previously known as ‘Part II’] §5 Following MS 144, we have run the third sentence on after the  second. §9 In the light of MS 144, 5–6, we have amalgamated remark (c) and (d) of p. 175 in the ﬁrst two editions into a single remark. §32, line 6 We have italicized ‘as’ to capture the emphasis given by ‘eben’. §34 The translation of the ﬁrst sentence as ‘There is a similarity here to the way in which “physical object” and “sense impressions” stand to each other’ is warranted on the grounds that the colon after ‘Es ist hier wie mit dem Verhältnis’ is meant to introduce two classes of expres- sions, not two classes of things. This interpretation is supported by Remarks on the Philosophy of Psychology (Blackwell, Oxford, 1980), vol. i, §289, which runs: ‘It is here just as with talk of physical objects and sense impressions. We have here two language-games, and their mutual relations are complicated.’ §35 It is evident from the context that ‘die Intention’ here should be translated as ‘intentionality’ and not as Anscombe had it: ‘intention’. Wittgenstein often used the German ‘Intention’ thus. §82 ‘for all that, does the service of a description’: the German runs ‘tut gleichwohl den Dienst einer Beschreibung’. Anscombe translated ‘for all that serves as a description’. But the occurrence of the noun Dienst 262 Notes to PPF 202e–7e is not coincidental. A cry does not serve as a description, but it does the same service as one, since both the cry and the utterance of a descrip- tion are criteria for ascribing pain to the person in question. §108 We have added Wittgenstein’s illustration here, which makes clear what he had in mind. See also Last Writings on the Philosophy of Psychology (Blackwell, Oxford, 1982), vol. i, §88. §118 ‘derived from Jastrow’: see J. Jastrow, Fact and Fable in Psychology (Houghton Mifﬂin, Boston, 1900). Wittgenstein refers to it as the ‘duck–hare’, but following Anscombe we have abided with the more usual name of ‘duck–rabbit’. ‘And I must distinguish between the “continuous seeing” of an aspect and an aspect’s “lighting up”.’ Anscombe translated the latter phrase as ‘the “dawning” of an aspect’. The German is Auﬂeuchten, which means ‘lighting up’ (as when a building is lit up by spotlights or a Christmas display of lights is turned on). Lighting up is an instantane- ous event, whereas dawning is a gradual process; a thought cannot  dawn on one in a ﬂash. Moreover, ‘dawning’ is overly intellectual a as in ‘it gradually dawned on me that things were thus-and-so’. §136 As it stands, this remark is altogether misleading, since ‘organ- ization’ is not compared with shape and colour in the visual impression; rather, ‘organization’ of the visual impression is compared with colour and shape. In MS 137, 127a, Wittgenstein wrote: Und das allein eliminiert für uns den Vergleich der ‘Organisation des Gesichseindrucks’ mit Farbe und Form. // Und das allein tut den Vergleich der ‘Organisation’ des Gesichtseindrucks’ mit der Farbe & Form im Gesichtsausdruck für mich ab. // And this sufﬁces to eliminate for us the comparison of the ‘organ- ization of the visual impression’ with colour and form. // And this sufﬁces to dispose of the comparison of the ‘organization’ of the visual impression with form and colour in the visual expression for me.// The attempted redraft is evidently poor (writing ‘visual expression’ instead