reason for this is straightforward: a swimming animal typically has a density roughly  equal to that of the surrounding water, so maintenance of balance against the force of  gravity is not a factor in swimming. Balance is a major problem for walking quadrupeds  and even more so for bipeds, as the tumbles of any young child demonstrate.  We shall first consider the control of swimming by neural circuits in the spinal cord of  the lamprey, a primitive aquatic vertebrate rather like an eel (lampreys are technically  cyclostomes, not fish). Lamprey swimming involves not just the generation of nonlinear  oscillations in individual segments of the spinal cord but also the coordination of these  oscillators along the cord so as to generate smooth traveling waves of neural activity  propagating along the body. The conditions for generation of traveling waves lead to a  formalism that can also be applied to phase locking in quadruped locomotion.  The chapter closes with a more detailed simulation of swimming in the marine mollusk  tritonia. The purpose of this second example is to show that neural network behavior may  profitably be studied at different levels of physiological and mathematical detail. Thus,  the neurons in the lamprey network will be described at the spike rate level, while those in  tritonia will involve simulation of the individual action potentials. Comparison of tritonia  and lamprey motor control networks also serves to highlight common principles sub- serving motor control in widely different species (Pearson, 1993).  13.1 Lamprey central pattern generators  A major concept underlying rhythmic motor behavior is that of a motor central pattern  generator. A central pattern generator may be defined as a neural network that will  produce stereotypical limit cycle oscillations in response to a constant spike rate input.  Fhe constant input, sometimes termed a command signal, typically serves to trigger the  oscillation and to determine its frequency and hence the speed of locomotion. Command  signals generally originate from higher motor control centers in vertebrates (although  they may also result from sensory input that triggers reflex movements), and they reflect  206  Spikes, decisions, and actions  the hierarchical nature of motor control. The classic example is the demonstration by  Shik et al. (1966) that a cat whose motor cortex has been isolated from the spinal cord can  be made to walk or run by electrical stimulation at an appropriate point in the midbrain.  Thus, the brain does not 'micro-manage' locomotion but only needs to decide the speed  and direction of motion, leaving the neural details of oscillatory pattern generation and  coordination to central pattern generators in the spinal cord.  Let us begin our study of central pattern generators with an examination of the lamprey  spinal cord. The lamprey is a primitive, eel-like vertebrate which swims by generating  traveling waves of neural activity that pass down its spinal cord, thus propelling the  animal forward (Gray, 1968; Grillner et ai, 1995). Several stages of swimming are  depicted in Fig. 13.1B, and a simulation of lamprey swimming can be viewed by running  the MatLab script SwimmingJLamprey.m. This swimming activity has been intensively  studied, and several excellent accounts of the neurophysiology are available (Cohen et ai,  1992; Grillner et ai, 1995; Grillner, 1996). It has been shown that an intact spinal cord  isolated from the rest of the body will generate rhythmic bursts of neural activity  appropriate for swimming in response to constant stimulation (which originates in the  brainstem in the intact animal). Further experiments have shown that even small sections  of the spinal cord are capable of generating rhythmic bursts of spikes in which activity on  Q  A  Rostral (head)  Caudal (tail)  Fig. 13.1 Coupled phase oscillators in the lamprey spinal cord (A), and body shape at four instants during  lamprey swimming (B).  Swimming and traveling waves  207  one side alternates with that on the other. Such oscillatory networks in the spinal segments  cause alternate contraction and relaxation of the body muscles on opposite sides of the  body during swimming.  Four types of neurons are present in each segment of the lamprey spinal cord: excita- tory intemeurons (E), lateral inhibitory interneurons (L), crossed inhibitory interneurons  (C), and motoneurons (M). The interconnections among these neurons are depicted in  Fig. 13.2A. Several considerations allow us to simplify this neural network. First, the  motoneurons are driven by the E neurons and only function to provide output from the  segmental oscillator to the muscles; they need not be simulated. Each half of the network 