than the velocity calculated from (15.40). This is a consequence of the higher peak of the  propagating wave in the analytical approximation, which is /? = 0.484 as compared to 0.36  in the simulation. If v is calculated from (15.40) with h = 0.36 from the simulation, the  result is v = 1.31 m/s, indicating that the overestimate of velocity indeed results from the  greater maximum of Fin the analytical solution.  In addition to producing traveling waves, such as action potential propagation,  diffusion-reaction equations can spontaneously generate complex one- and two- dimensional spatial patterns. The mathematical basts for this is similar to that underlying  >  E  c  £ o  0- -tanh  Direction  of Motion^  4  6  Distance (mm)  10  Fig. 15.6 Simulation (15.33) for spike propagation compared with analytical solution (tanh) in (15.42). Both  are moving to the right.  268  Spikes, decisions, and actions  visual hallucinations (see Chapter 7). In diffusion-reaction systems, different diffusion  length constants for different chemicals play roles analogous to different excitatory and  inhibitory spread functions in equations such as (7.22). Many dynamical models of  pattern generation during morphological development are based on diffusion-reaction  dynamics, and these models explain how leopards get their spots, tigers their stripes, and  butterflies their wing patterns. These aspects of diffusion-reaction equation theory are  elegantly developed by Murray (1989).  15.7  Compartmental models and dendritic spikes  Our analysis of action potential propagation shows that nonlinear diffusion reaction  problems are sometimes amenable to analytical treatment. More generally, however,  nonlinear diffusion problems must be solved by numerical approximation. Complex  dendritic trees contain not just synaptic currents but also a wide range of active, nonlinear  Na+ and Ca2+ currents. To deal with such complex dendritic trees. Rail (1962, 1967)  introduced what are known as compartmental models. Compartmental models are  derived directly from (15.1) and (15.2) without passing to the limit A.v —> 0 that resulted in  the diffusion equation. The result is a series of coupled ordinary differential equations in  which time varies continuously but the spatial extent of dendrites is chopped into a finite  number of discrete compartments of finite length, each of which interacts with the  compartments adjacent to it. It is assumed that each compartment is sufficiently small so  as to be approximately isopotential. Thus, the kih compartment of a dendritic tree would  be described by an equation of the form:  i rr  A1'  C -— = - J2h + Sk-\.k(Vk-i - F,) + gw+1( Vk+] - Vk)  (15.45)  where /, are the various ionic currents (synaptic, leakage, voltage gated, injected, etc.)  passing through the membrane of the compartment. The two final terms in (15.45)  represent the current flow or flux (see 15.1) into the compartment from the adjacent  compartments, with gk-\,k andg^A+i being the respective conductances. Note that in this  case the conductance can vary along a dendrite rather than being constant as was assumed  above. Segev et al. (1989) describe in detail how a complex dendritic tree with multiple  branches can be reduced to a compartmental model.  To see what can be learned by implementing a compartmental dendritic model, let us  consider the nature of active spike propagation from the soma back into dendrites. It has  recently been shown that spikes initiated at the soma or axon hillock are actively pro- pagated back up the apical dendrite of hippocampal and cortical pyramidal cells (Stuart  andSakmann, 1994; Magee and Johnston, 1995, 1997; Johnstone? ai, 1996; Stuart et ai,  1997). These dendritic spikes result from the presence of voltage-gated Na+ channels in  the dendritic membrane as well as in the axon hillock. Unlike axonal spikes, however,  dendritic spikes decrease in amplitude as they propagate back up the dendrite away from  the soma. In addition, dendritic spikes can apparently only be initiated at the axon hillock  Diffusion and dendrites  269  but not in the dendrite itself (Stuart and Sakmann, 1994). Mainen et al. (1995) developed a  compartmental model to study the nature of dendritic spike propagation, and the model 