the resting state of (9.10) when / = 0, and (10.1) has been constructed so that H = 0 in this  resting state. Thus, the /AHP conductance H only has an effect at suprathreshold levels,  where it grows quadratically with V. Because the H variable has such a long time- constant, it has no effect on action potential shape but instead functions to slowly  counteract part of the stimulating current /, thus reducing the spike rate. If you run the  MatLab script RegularSpiking.m with / = 0.85, you will obtain the spike train depicted in  Fig. 10.1 A. The /AHP current causes the interspike interval to increase almost threefold  within 100 ms. Figure 10.1 A also shows that after the stimulating current/is terminated,  the neuron displays a prominent afterhyperpolarizing potential that results from the very  slow decay of H in (10.1) back to its equilibrium value.  The analysis of (10.1) via linearization is very easy, because all of the nonlinearities have  been limited to cubic order, so the Jacobian is only quadratic in F(see Exercise 1). Because  H = 0 at threshold and its time constant is so long, action potential initiation in (10.1)  again begins at a saddle-node bifurcation as depicted in Fig. 9.9. Because of its accel- erating quadratic dependence on F, //is mainly driven by suprathreshold current levels,  so it slowly reduces the effective value of the simulating current /, thus producing spike  frequency adaptation.  The spike rate adaptation produced by //in (10.1) is plotted as instantaneous spike rate  (reciprocals of successive interspike intervals) in Fig. 10.IB for / = 1.8. This may be  compared with the data for a human regular-spiking neuron plotted in Fig. 10.1C  (Lorenzon and Foehring, 1992). Equation (10.1) accurately describes spike frequency  adaptation in human and mammalian regular-spiking neurons, which typically causes  about a threefold reduction in spike rate within 100 ms. Initial and asymptotic spike rates  for eqn (10.1) as a function of input current / are compared with data from a second  human regular-spiking neuron (Avoli et al., 1994) in Fig. 10.2. The model correctly  predicts that both spike rates will be almost linear functions of/above a threshold value  (Wilson, 1999), although additional factors (Fdependence of rR) are necessary to explain  saturation effects at high current levels.  N  -1.  '  <n  IT  -^  n  CO  2 5 0  2 0 0  1 50  1 0 0  5 0  0 - • • • • Transient  o - - Steady State  L-—rzr\—i—i—<—i—  Human RS Neuron  Model Transient  Model Steady  I  !__!  Fig. 10.2 Initial transient and steady state spike rates for a regular-spiking neuron as a function of stimulus  current /. Solid and open circles show transient and sustained data for a human regular-spiking neuron  respectively (reproduced with permission, Avoli el al., 1994, copyright Springer-Verlag). Solid lines show  transient and steady state responses of (10.1).  Neural adaptation and bursting  159  We have now developed and analyzed dynamical models of two types of human cortical  neurons: the excitatory regular-spiking neurons in (10.1), and the inhibitory fast-spiking  neurons in (9.10) with rR = 2.1 ms. It is significant that only regular-spiking neurons and  not fast-spiking exhibit spike frequency adaptation. Furthermore, the /AHP current can be  reduced or blocked in humans by acetylcholine, histamine, norepinephrine, or serotonin,  all of which are modulatory neurotransmitters in the nervous system (McCormick and  Williamson, 1989). Thus, the excitability of regular-spiking neurons can be controlled by  varying the strength of the /AHP current in eqn (10.1). Inhibitory, fast-spiking neurons,  however, are always in a maximally excitable state, presumably so that they can prevent  runaway excitation and seizures.  10.2 Neural bursting and hysteresis  Slow afterhyperpolarizing /AHP potentials provide the basis for spike frequency adap- tation, and they can also produce more dramatic patterns of neural activity. Chay and 