where Lg is the length of the vector and 8 is its direction. In neural terms', Lg represents the  firing rate of an input neuron optimally sensitive to motion in direction 8, and the cosine  represents the synaptic weighting function. As mentioned above, cosine weighting is  common in primate motor neurons (Georgopoulos et al., 1986. 1993), and it is even found  in the cricket (Theunissen and Miller, 1991) and leech (Lewis and Kristan, 1998) nervous  systems. Thus, one may conjecture that cosine weighting is an early evolutionary adap- tation to the ubiquitous requirement for animals to perform vector computations on their  sensory inputs.  In addition to receiving a cosine-weighted input given by (7.4), the network neurons  engage in a winner-take-all competition via recurrent inhibition. This, however, is a  modified WTA scenario in two respects. As shown in Fig. 7.5. each neuron vigorously  inhibits the range of neurons enclosed by gray regions, but it neither inhibits its two  nearest neighbors, N±\ and Ni2, nor neurons signaling roughly diametrically opposite  directions of motion. (All inhibitory interactions are symmetrical; for clarity only the  inhibitory connections of one unit are depicted.) This network is therefore a WTA net- work with a restricted range of competition. As you might conjecture from the con- nectivity pattern, there are two consequences of this restricted competition. First, near  neighbors of the winner will survive the competition. Second, there can be two winners if  they receive almost diametrically opposed inputs. We shall see in a moment that this is  Computation by excitatory and inhibitory networks  95  N-l  "  N  ®0©0®  Fig. 7.5 Vector summation network for motion perception. Each of the 24 neurons signals a different  direction of motion in 15° increments. Each unit also strongly inhibits all other units tuned to the relative  directions depicted in the gray regions, excluding its two nearest neighbors N±\ and N±2 along with units  close to the opposite direction of motion. Each unit has the same relative set of inhibitory connections  centered on its preferred direction, but only one set is shown for clarity.  correct. The equations describing the network are:  n+9oc  n.±i20c  T^=-Rn+[  Y. Eecos(n-8)-k  J J  Ra  7=fi-90°  a=fi±45°  (7.5)  where RQ is the response of the neuron with preferred direction fi in 15° increments. The  brackets with the + subscript indicate that this expression is identically zero when the  argument within the brackets is less than zero. This is an extremely simple nonlinearity  with a threshold at zero and a linear response above threshold. However, this is sufficient  for the network to perform vector computations. The strength of the inhibitory feedback  k is not critical as long as it is sufficiently strong to suppress other neural activity.  The network in eqn (7.5) is implemented in MatLab script VectorWTA.m, where k = 3.  If you run the simulation with vector lengths of 20 and angles of ±40°, you will see that  the network indicates a perceived direction of 0°, which is the experimental observation  depicted in Fig. 7.4. The response of the network in this case is a set of three neighboring  active neurons signaling directions -15°, 0°, and 15° as shown in Fig. 7.6 (left), while all  other neurons have been suppressed by the WTA inhibition. This triad of neighboring  winners in the network results from the absence of recurrent inhibition onto the two  neighbors N± | and A±2 on either side of each unit. Activity in N\ will inhibit the A_2 unit,  96  150  Spikes, decisions, and actions  90  90  150  180  0  180  210  330  210  270  Rigid Motion  270  Transparent Motion  Fig. 7.6  Responses of (7.5) to ±40° vectors (left) and ± 75° vectors (right) plotted in polar coordinates. The  set of three responding neurons on the left signals rigid rightward motion, while the two sets of three active  units on the right signal transparent motion.  and A_ i will inhibit N2; so only three units will survive the inhibitory competition. By thus  preserving the activity of the winning unit's nearest neighbors in the steady state, the  network provides a sparse population code for vector direction that is much more 