 spikes  decisions..  -^actions  dynamical foundations of neuroscience  HUGH R. WILSON  Spikes, decisions, and actions  The dynamical foundations of neuroscience  Spikes, decisions, and actions  The dynamical foundations  of neuroscience  HUGH R. WILSON  Visual Sciences Center, University of Chicago  OXJORD  UNIVERSITY PRESS  OXFORD  UNIVERSITY PRESS  Great Clarendon Street. Oxford OX2 6DP  Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.  It furthers the University's objective of excellence in research, scholarship.  and education by publishing worldwide in  Oxford New York  Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi  Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi  New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto  With offices in  Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece  Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore  South Korea Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam  Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press  in the UK and in certain other countries  Published in the United States  by Oxford University Press Inc., New York  © H.R.Wilson, 1999  The moral rights of the authors have been asserted  First published 1999  Reprinted 2002, 2003, 2005  All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,  stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means.  without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press.  Within the UK, exceptions are allowed in respect of any fair dealing for the  purpose of research or private study, or criticism or review, as permitted  under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. or in the case of  reprographic reproduction in accordance with the terms of licences  issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency. Enquiries concerning  reproduction outside these terms and in other countries should be  sent to the Rights Department. Oxford University Press.  at the address above.  This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way  of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out or otherwise circulated  without the publisher's prior consent in any form of binding or cover  other than that in which it is published and w ithout a similar condition  including this condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser  British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data  Data available  Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data  ISBN 0-19-852431-5 (Hbk)  ISBN 0-19-852430-7 (Pbk)  Printed in Great Britain by  Antony Rowe Ltd., Chippenham. Wiltshire  To Fran, whose loving support  and intellectual companionship  made this book possible  Preface  There is one central reason why all neuroscientists and biopsychologists should be conver- sant with nonlinear dynamics. Nonlinear dynamics reveals and elucidates a range of phe- nomena that are simply inconceivable in the more mundane world of linear systems theory.  Memory and forgetting, decision making, motor control, action potentials, and perhaps even  free will and determinism can no longer be intelligently conceptualized without a basic  understanding of nonlinear systems. At the deepest level, therefore, my decision to write this  book was predicated on the belief that an understanding of brain function and behavior must  be grounded in a conceptual framework informed by nonlinear dynamics.  When I received my Ph.D. in theoretical chemistry in 1969 I was not familiar with many  of the nonlinear dynamical phenomena developed in this book, and others such as chaos  were just being discovered and understood by mathematicians. Theoretical chemistry and  physics of the time did deal with nonlinearities, but the general approach was to hope that  they were small and then expand solutions in a Taylor series retaining only the first few  terms. When I was given the opportunity to switch my focus to mathematical biology by  Stuart Rice, my Ph.D. advisor, and Jack Cowan, who offered me a postdoctoral position in  the Department of Theoretical Biology at The University of Chicago, my awareness of non- linear dynamical phenomena began to expand immensely.  As a result of this new exposure to nonlinear dynamics, I began to use these dynamical con- cepts in my own research on the visual system, and I designed a graduate level course in 1973  to teach these concepts to others. For the first few years the course was populated by a combi- nation of theoretical biology, physics, and chemistry students. Then the physics and chemistry  departments began offering this material to their students, so my course was discontinued. It  was due to the recent upsurge of interest in neural modeling, connectionist and otherwise, that  I decided to resurrect the course and restructure it to focus exclusively on neuroscience. Just  as physicists are aided in learning mathematics by using examples such as oscillating springs 