implanted for medical reasons showed major activation of parietal area 7 in mental  addition and subtraction (Abdullaev and Melnichuk, 1996). This is consistent with evi- dence that damage to inferior parietal cortex can produce major deficits in numerical  abilities, termed 'acalcula' (Dehaene, 1997). These same studies also demonstrate that  mathematics is not a language in any ordinary sense: subjects with brain damage leading  to acalcula can still retain completely normal language abilities. Far from being a lan- guage, mathematics represents a thoroughly independent and powerful mode of brain  function! Fhis conclusion is also supported by the dissociation between linguistic and  mathematical-spatial abilities in the human population. Relative to their percentage in  the population, left-handers are twice as highly represented as right-handers among the  most creative individuals in fields requiring mathematical or spatial reasoning abilities  (e.g. Newton, Einstein, Da Vinci, Michelangelo, Picasso). However, lefties on average fall  below their dexterous counterparts in linguistic abilities.  Neurophysiological studies of parietal cortex in monkeys indicate that it contains a  number of distinct areas that are collectively involved in perception of motion and surface  orientation, and the visual guidance of object manipulation (Milner and Goodale, 1995;  Sakata et ai, 1997). In fact, there is both physiological and clinical evidence that separate  subdivisions of the parietal cortex subserve vision of peripersonal space (i.e. space within  reaching distance) and extrapersonal space (Sakata and Kusonoki, 1992; Cowey et ai,  1994). Neurons in these areas are involved in both the visual and tactile (somatosensory)  perception of motion, position, and surface orientation in three dimensions. Clearly, any  cortical area devoted to both vision and touch could only correlate such information  within peripersonal space. To carry out their functions normally, parietal areas must  perform multiple vector summation and subtraction operations in order to compute both  direction of motion and the location of the hand given only joint angle information, and a  neural network capable of carrying out these computations was analyzed in Chapter 7  (Wilson et ai, 1992; Wilson and Kim, 1994). Furthermore, many visually guided object  manipulations are voluntary actions, so some aspects of parietal neural activity must be  Nonlinear dynamics and brain function  285  accessible to or even a component of consciousness. This is manifestly true for humans  and is probably true for great apes as well.  The mathematician Hadamard (1945) argued that mathematical thought was primarily  visual and kinematic in nature, and reflection on the contents of Spikes, decisions, and  actions reveals the striking degree to which our understanding of nonlinear dynamics  relies on spatial visual concepts. Thus, phase plane analysis clearly involves visualization  of vector flow fields in two dimensions, and Lyapunov function theory shows that non- linear differential equations are intimately associated with surfaces in multi-dimensional  spaces. Even chaos requires a visual appreciation of the fact that three dimensions are  required for a trajectory to wander about in a bounded region without ever coming to rest  or intersecting itself. Finally, three major discoveries in the history of mathematics reveal  the spatial aspects of abstract mathematics: the Pythagorean theorem, the discovery of  conic sections by the Greeks and the invention of analytical geometry by Descartes. The  Pythagorean theorem was believed by Herodotus (450 B.C.) to have been inspired by the  practices of Egyptian surveyors using 3-^4-5 rope triangles to create right angles. Ana- lytical geometry showed that the solutions of simultaneous algebraic equations could  be viewed as intersections of lines or surfaces in space. Regarding conic sections, I am  reminded of an episode that occurred when I was an undergraduate at Wesleyan  University. Rich Young, a blind classmate and mathematics student, asked a group of us  one day why parabolas, ellipses, circles, and hyperbolas were called conic sections.  Someone quickly made a cone from a sheet of paper and let Rich feel the different ways in  which he could grasp the cone with his fingers. An instant smile of recognition spread  across his face as he saw the concept with his hands! Recall that parietal cortex integrates  both visual and tactile information.  Further confirmation of a correlation between visually guided manipulation and  mathematics comes from studies of gesturing during conversation. McNeill (1992)  videotaped conversations about abstract mathematics carried on by two professional  mathematicians. The striking result was that spatially meaningful hand gestures were  almost perfectly correlated with the verbal expression of certain abstract mathematical 