5  abstraction are clearly relevant in theoretical neuroscience. For example, in my own work  on visual system function, neural descriptions at the level of spike rates have proved to be  extremely useful in simulating motion perception (Wilson and Kim, 1994), retinal light  adaptation (Wilson, 1997), and aspects of cortical function (Wilson and Cowan, 1973).  On the other hand, a scientist interested in intracellular recordings from individual  neurons would surely require a much more detailed level of description. The material in  this book encompasses three levels of neural description. The most general level is that of a  neural network in which each neuron is represented by a continuous variable describing  its varying spike rate. This level of description is adequate for simulating many aspects of  categorization, decision making, short-term memory, and motor control. Description of  a neuron by its spike rate is comparable to representation of responses by post-stimulus  time histograms in the experimental literature (see Fig. 1.1). The next level of description  focuses on the generation of spike trains produced by multiple ionic currents. This is the  level of analysis of Hodgkin-Huxley and related equations. Finally, the most detailed  level incorporates diffusion of ionic potentials along dendrites with complex geometry.  Each of these levels of abstraction is appropriate for some theoretical purposes but  inappropriate for others. An appreciation of the conditions under which each may be  optimal will emerge from the chapters that follow.  1.3 Mathematical background  This book is intended to be useful to anyone who has completed one to two years of  calculus and who is also familiar with some of the basics of vectors and matrices. A  semester of linear differential equations would also be very helpful. The single most  important concept from calculus is that of the exponential function and its derivative,  which describes processes of growth and decay. To fix these ideas, suppose that a colony  of microorganisms has population Fat the beginning of an experiment. If the fraction of  organisms that reproduce per unit time is k, then increases in the population will be  described by the differential equation:  This just states that the rate of change of the population, dF/dt, is proportional to the  current population level F. As we shall see in the next chapter, eqn (1.1) is solved by the  exponential function, which we shall now derive.  1.3.1  The exponential  function  All scientists are familiar with the exponential function e', where e = 2.71828 — How- ever, it is frequently forgotten that e is actually determined by the solution to a differential  6  Spikes, decisions, and actions  equation. To see the central importance of e to differential equations, let us consider the  differential equation satisfied by e':  ^  = e<  (1-2)  dt  This equation states that e is the unique constant such that the function e' is its  own derivative. To see the consequences of this, first consider the definition of the  derivative:  de'  e'+/' - e'  ^  = l i m ^ — —  (1.3)  dt  h^o  h  Using the observation that a'+h = a'a1' for any positive a, h, and /, we deduce:  lim  —- = e ' l i m ^ - ^  (1.4)  A^O  h  A-0  It  Substitution of (1.4) and (1.3) into (1.2) yields the result:  eA - 1  lim-—— = 1  (1.5)  A-o  h  Although the actual derivation is somewhat complex, it can now be shown that the value  e satisfying (1.4) is given by:  e = lim(l+/i),/''  (1.6)  The value of e may be approximated to any desired accuracy using (1.6). For example,  h= 1/10 and h = 1/1000 yield:  10  e « ( l + -  =2.5937  x 1000  = 2.7169  •7)  1000  Thus, the value of e is determined by the differential equation (1.2). In the chapters that  follow, the exponential function will be seen to provide the basis for analyzing virtually all  differential equations of scientific interest.  Introduction  1  1.3.2  Taylor series  A second very important concept is that of a Taylor series expansion. We shall frequently  make use of the fact that near t = a, a function /?) may be approximated by:  f\t) ^f(a) + h ^ l + ^ ^ l  + (higher order terms) 