Fig. 8.13 Three examples of perceptual oscillations: the Necker cube (top), binocular rivalry (center), and the  Marroquin figure (bottom). The cube A oscillates between the two three-dimensional interpretations in B and  C. If one eye views the horizontal bars in the middle, while the other views the verticals, binocular rivalry  ensues. The Marroquin figure generates the percept of scintillating circles.  ambiguous figures such as the Necker cube (Fig. 8.13, top). A second is binocular rivalry,  which is produced by viewing vertical stripes with one eye and horizontal stripes with the  other eye. One sees an alternation between horizontal and vertical stripes with a period of  2-4 s (Fox and Herrmann, 1967). Binocular rivalry may be experienced by running the  MatLab program BinocRivalry.m. If you view the colored bar pattern produced by the  134  Spikes, decisions, and actions  program through red-green stereoscopic glasses (i.e. place green cellophane over one eye  and red cellophane over the other), you should see quite dramatic perceptual alternations  between horizontal and vertical bars. These perceptual reversals are believed to reflect  adaptation of inhibitory circuits in the visual cortex (Blake, 1989). Finally, the Marroquin  figure at the bottom of Fig. 8.13 produces a scintillation of circular shapes at various  locations in the pattern, and these can be explained using a spatial network version of  (8.20) (Wilson et al., 1999).  These three perceptual alternations are by no means as precise as the limit cycle in  Fig. 8.11. but this is doubtless due to the involvement of many more than just two neurons  in the relevant networks and to the presence of physiological noise in the visual system.  The important observation is that there are a variety of perceptual alternations that can  be explained on the basis of limit cycles in competitive networks incorporating  neural adaptation (Wilson et al., 1999). In addition, limit cycles based on neural adap- tation form a basis for lamprey swimming control (see Chapter 13).  8.7  Exercises  1. The following equations are a somewhat more complex version of (8.8) for describing  action potential generation:  — = -V3 +3V2 ±0.125- R + I  dt  f=-R  + 5V2-l  dt  Plot the isoclines and analyze all of the equilibrium states for/ = 0. Based on this analysis,  draw closed curves indicating all possible locations in the phase plane at which limit cycles  might occur. You need not simulate these equations, as we will be discussing more  sophisticated versions of them in Chapter 9.  2. Consider the following pair of equations, which represent a somewhat different form  of (8.8):  R  After showing that V = 0,R = 0 is an equilibrium point, prove the existence of a limit  cycle as the Hopf parameter 0 passes through a critical value o. Determine the value of Q  analytically, and estimate the frequency of the limit cycle that will emerge at that point.  Using methods analogous to those in (8.16), prove that the nonlinear terms cause all  trajectories to decay to the origin when 0 = a. Finally, simulate these equations for a value  of 0 that produces a small amplitude limit cycle and compare the frequency of the  simulation with your analytic result.  dF  ~dt "  dF  ~d7~  /  10 \  0.8(  0 V  -R  —  +  fv5  —  V.3  V)  Nonlinear oscillations  135  3. Consider the FitzHugh-Nagumo equations in (8.8), which have many of the  qualitative properties of the Hodgkin-Huxley equations. Using /mpul as the relevant  parameter, prove that these equations undergo two Hopf bifurcations, and indicate  whether each is subcritical or supercritical. Using your proof and Runge-Kutta simu- lations, produce a bifurcation diagram analogous to that in Fig. 8.9 that includes both  bifurcations. (Hint: solve for Fat the bifurcations using the Jacobian in (8.11), then use  this information to solve for /mput at each bifurcation.)  4. The Wilson-Cowan (1972) oscillator originally incorporated a different mathematical  form of the nonlinear firing rate function: the logistic function instead of the Naka-