A > 0  Assuming that K\ = K2 = K3 = 80, find and analyze the stability of all steady states.  Simulate the network for the values of K above and the following initial conditions:  (a) Ei = 2, E2 = 1, F3 = 0; and (b) F, = 1, F2 = /, E3 = 2. What is the final state of the  system in each case?  Computation by excitatory and  inhibitory networks  With the techniques developed in the previous chapter it is now possible to analyze many  rather complex networks with multiple steady states. Accordingly, let us examine larger  neural networks that use differing balances of excitation and inhibition to perform a  variety of sophisticated computations of functional significance. Several of these  embellish the basic 'winner-take-alf (WTA) network, which was developed in the last  chapter. First, we shall examine a WTA network that chooses the largest stimulus among  a wide number of alternatives. Such networks make neural decisions based on the  strength of the sensory evidence. Next, a WTA network with appropriate combinations of  inputs will be shown to perform vector summation for any number of input vectors.  Vector summation is important in motor control, somatosensory perception, and motion  perception. An embellishment of this vector summation network will also predict whether  motion will be seen as transparent or rigid, an example of perceptual categorization.  Finally, we shall analyze the Wilson-Cowan (1973) equations for excitatory and inhi- bitory interactions in the neocortex. These equations give rise to a variety of dynamical  phenomena for different ranges of parameter values and form the basis for an explanation  of visual hallucinations (Ermentrout and Cowan. 1979).  7.1  Winner-take-all networks  Neural networks in which each neuron inhibits all other neurons except itself are known  as winner-take-all networks. As noted in the previous chapter, mutual inhibition is a form  of competition, and the neuron with the largest external input generally wins this com- petition by suppressing the other neurons below their thresholds. If the external input to  each neuron is regarded as data supporting the response which that neuron would signal,  then winner-take-all (WTA) networks make decisions based upon the preponderance of  supporting evidence.  Let us consider an important experimental paradigm known as visual search. Visual  search is a task that we are all confronted with frequently: pick out the face of a friend in a  crowd, or find the utensil you need in a cluttered drawer. In the laboratory visual search is  studied by requiring subjects to find a unique item in a collection of distracting items.  Experiments typically measure the reaction time (time required to locate the unique item)  as a function of the number of distractors. Two typical displays, each containing a unique  target item and eight distractors are depicted in Fig. 7.1. When you look at the figure, the  target item is so obvious in the top panel that it seems to pop-out of the background of  Computation  by excitatory and inhibitory  networks  89  Fig. 7.1 Typical stimuli for a visual search experiment. The unique element in A 'pops-out' of the field of  distractors, and reaction times are accordingly fast. The unique element in B is much harder to detect, and  reaction times are much longer.  distractors. In the bottom panel, however, the task is considerably more difficult, and this  is reflected in the longer reaction time required to locate the unique item. Treisman (1982)  discovered that when the distractors are very different from the target item, the reaction  time to detect the target is short and almost independent of the number of distractors, as is  illustrated by the curve with open circles in Fig. 7.2. When the distractors are very similar  to the target, however, reaction times are much slower and increase dramatically with the  number of distractors. This is shown by the solid symbols in Fig. 7.2. As reaction times in  this case increase by a similar number of milliseconds per distractor, many have inferred  that this data pattern reflects serial processing in the brain. When a target pops out of the  distractors so that reaction time is independent of the number of distractors, it has been  argued conversely that the brain is employing a parallel processing strategy (Treisman,  1982; Treisman and Gelade, 1980; Bergen and Julesz, 1983).  A winner-take-all network may be used to provide a novel interpretation of these visual  search data. Using the Naka-Rushton function (2.11) to describe spike rates, the network 