lipid bilayer of the axon membrane forms a thin insulating sheet that serves to store  electrical charge in the same way as an electrical capacitor (cf. Hille, 1992; Johnston and  Wu, 1995; Delcomyn, 1998). Hodgkin and Huxley discovered empirically that the con- ductances were not constant but rather were functions of the membrane potential V, and  this voltage dependence is the key to understanding action potentials. Therefore, (9.1) was  dm  dt  dh  d?  d«  1  T„(V)  1  T„(V)  1  ,  Action potentials and limit cycles  137  rewritten as:  dF  ,  C -jj = -gn&mh( V - FNa) - gK«,( F - £K) - gleak( F - £,eak) ± /input  -(-/>; ±M(F))  (9.2)  (-/t±//(F))  (-«±A(F))  d?  T„(K)  In the first equation, £NA. £K . and £ieak are the equilibrium potentials at which each of the  three currents is balanced by ionic concentration differences across the membrane. Evi- dently, the Hodgkin-Huxley equations are a fourth order system of nonlinear differential  equations. The additional variables m. It, and n represent the rates of Na conductance  channel activation, Na channel inactivation, and K channel activation respectively.  Nonlinearity results from the fact that the equilibrium values of these variables, M(V),  H(V), and N(V) are all functions of the membrane potential V, as are the time constants  T,„, Th, and T„. Explicit mathematical forms for all these functions may be found in  Hodgkin and Huxley (1952), Cronin (1987), and Johnston and Wu (1995).  The scientific content of the Hodgkin-Huxley equations comes from two sources. First  is the observance of Ohm's law for the individual currents. The second is the hypothesis  that the Na, K and leakage currents are all independent and therefore sum in (9.1). This  hypothesis was tested by solving the mathematical model (9.2) that resulted (on a  mechanical desk calculator!) and showing that it reproduced the experimentally observed  shape and duration of the action potential in the squid giant axon. The mathematical  forms chosen for the functions T„„ T/,, T„, M(V), H(V), and N(V), were biologically  motivated curve fits to the data. Hodgkin and Huxley's (1952) work represents the  first and perhaps most dramatic success of nonlinear dynamics in predicting neuro- physiological data.  The mathematical forms chosen by Hodgkin and Huxley for functions T,„, 77,, r„, M( V),  H(V), and N(V) are all transcendental functions. Both this and the presence of four  equations in (9.2) make the Hodgkin-Huxley equations difficult to analyze mathemat- ically. Fortunately, detailed study of these equations has led to several insightful sim- plifications. Rinzel (1985) noticed that r,„ is so small for all values of Kthat the variable m  rapidly approaches its equilibrium value, M(V). As a good approximation, therefore, the  second equation in (9.2) can be eliminated and m = M(V) substituted into the equation  for dV/dt. Second, Rinzel noted that the equations for h and n were similar in time course  and in their equilibrium values H(V) and N(V). In fact, an accurate approximation is  obtained by setting h = 1 —n. What this means in ionic terms is that Na+ channel closing,  h, occurs at the same rate but in the opposite direction to K+ channel opening, n.  Fhis relationship permits one to eliminate the equation for h, thereby reducing (9.2) to a  138  Spikes, decisions, and actions  two-dimension dynamical system. Under these assumptions, (9.2) assumes the form  (Rinzel, 1985):  C~  = -gN,M( V)\\  -R)(V-  £Na) - gKR4( F - £K) - Sieak(V- £,eak) ± /  d?  dR  1  d?  rR(F)  -R + G(V  (9.3)  TR(F) = 1 ± 5 exp -(F±60)'  552  Fo emphasize the simplifications and changes of variables, R has been used to describe 