and planetary motion, so I believe that neuroscientists can more easily grasp the mathematical  concepts if examples involve action potentials, hysteresis in memory, and so on.  Spikes, decisions, and actions is intended for three audiences: advanced undergraduates in  neuroscience or physiological psychology, graduate students, and professionals in these  areas who wish to develop neural simulations relevant to their own interests. When I speak  of neuroscience here, I intend it in the broadest sense that encompasses cellular and molecu- lar neurobiology, systems neurobiology, psychophysics, and other fields where the object of  study is the nervous system. As the book is based on a one-semester course that I have taught  at the University of Chicago intermittently over the past 25 years, the book can readily be  used in similar courses. In addition, the book may be used to supplement standard courses in  advanced calculus, differential equations, or computer modeling when an introduction to  nonlinear dynamics in biology is desired.  viii  Preface  The mathematical background assumed by the book is a minimum of one to two years of  calculus. Ideally, the reader will have been exposed to an introductory course on linear dif- ferential equations and some linear algebra. The essential material from such courses is out- lined in Chapters 1-3, which can be glossed over by the mathematically sophisticated reader.  Chapter 4 on higher order linear differential equations contains material on time lags and the  Routh-Hurwitz criterion for oscillations that will merit review by most readers. Following  Chapter 5 on numerical methods (mainly Runge-Kutta), problems in nonlinear neurodynam- ics are explored in an orderly sequence: multiple steady states and hysteresis, limit cycles,  action potentials and bursting, chaos, neural synchronization, and Lyapunov functions.  Finally, the cable or diffusion equation is presented as an avenue to dendritic potentials and  compartmental neurons. Throughout, the mathematics is intermingled with the neuroscience  of ionic currents, action potentials, motor control, and memory.  The book is accompanied by a disk containing many MatLab™ scripts that are intended  to complement the text. These simulations will help to solidify and elucidate analytic results  and concepts derived in the text, and they should also enhance the utility of the book for self- study. Beyond this, their inclusion brings the book closer to the realities of research in theo- retical neuroscience, where a combination of analysis and simulation is to be found in much  of the best work. MatLab was chosen because the scripts will run on the Macintosh, UNIX,  or Windows platforms. Also, MatLab is the most common simulation language in my own  area, vision research. Most scripts will run in the student version of MatLab, but a few  towards the end of the book may require larger arrays than the student version permits. A  brief Appendix introduces the MatLab scripts and their use with this book.  I have attempted to make the text as readable as possible by avoiding undue use of  abstruse mathematical terminology. While this may annoy some who are mathematically  sophisticated, it is my experience that most neuroscience students find this to be a more con- genial approach to difficult mathematical concepts. In the same vein, I have frequently writ- ten in the first person plural, using 'we' and 'us'. I hope this will encourage the reader to  view this book as a journey of exploration we are taking together.  A number of problems accompany each chapter. In addition, the text encourages the  reader to explore different parameter ranges in many of the simulations, and this functions as  a form of self-teaching problem. Given the MatLab simulations, it should be relatively easy  for an instructor to create additional problems as desired.  Mathematics texts inevitably suffer from a number of typographical errors, particularly  because equations are so difficult to proofread. I have checked the book several times but  take full responsibility for any remaining errors. To aid the reader, I shall list known errors  and corrections on the web site: http://spikes.bsd.uchicago.edu. Readers discovering errors  are requested to e-mail me at hrw6@midway.uchicago.edu, and I will post them on the web.  In writing this book, I have done my symbolic derivations using Maple MathView™ soft- ware on the Macintosh. Use of this computer algebra and calculus software has been enor- mously valuable in minimizing errors in lengthy derivations. MathView™, Maple™, and  Mathematica™ software are all of great value in conducting analytic manipulations, and  readers familiar with any of these programs are encouraged to use them.  Many individuals have contributed directly or indirectly to Spikes, decisions, and actions.  First were my parents, Hugh and Georgine Wilson, who always encouraged me to find learn-