stants in agreement with (12.25). This can be seen by running LGNsynchrony.m with  ^E = 2,k] = 20, and I-I synaptic weighting k\\ = 4 (this script takes several minutes to  run). Note that no attempt has been made to adjust parameters to the detailed char- acteristics of LGN or PGN neurons, so the oscillations occur at a lower frequency (about  2 Hz) than is produced by models with appropriately tailored parameters (e.g. Destexhe  et ai, 1993). However, synchronized sleep LGN oscillations can occur at rates compar- able to the model (Steriade et ai, 1993). Also, the bursting observed experimentally does  202  Spikes, decisions, and actions  eventually die out, while the model bursting continues indefinitely. However, burst ces- sation can be explained by the operation of an additional Ca2+ current, /CAN (Partridge  and Swandulla, 1988; Bal and McCormick, 1993; Destexhe et ai, 1993). This current has  also been reported to increase oscillation frequency in model simulations (Destexhe et ai,  1993).  The LGN-PGN network in Fig. 12.6 is, of course, only a small segment of the entire  neural ensemble within these thalamic nuclei. However, it would be easy to extend the  network by incorporating a large spatial array of adjacent E and I neurons. Without even  doing so, however, it is possible to draw one more interesting conclusion about the  dynamics of such a network. Once E2 and F begin firing, one would expect inhibition  from F to trigger PIR bursting in neighboring E3 and I3 of an extended network. This  sequence of events would repeat itself, leading to a traveling wavefront of neural acti- vation sweeping across the network. This is exactly what is observed experimentally  following localized stimulation of the LGN-PGN network (Kim et ai, 1995)!  12.6 Synopsis of phase locking  As many aspects of phase locking and neural synchrony have been explored in this  chapter, it may be useful to summarize key points. The phase oscillator introduced by  Cohen et al. (1982) has proven extremely valuable in providing explanations of many  aspects of neural phase locking. The simplest phase oscillator model (12.3) uses H(<p)  from (12.6) and assumes that synaptic effects may be described by pulses following a delay  0. This model predicts many aspects of phase locking and synchrony in more detailed  neural networks as long as the synaptic time constant is sufficiently fast. If postinhibitory  rebound (PIR) is included, this model predicts the anti-phase locking and ongoing  oscillation of the Clione swimming network as shown in Fig. 12.2.  The surprising fact that neural synchronization is frequently due to reciprocal inhi- bition rather than to excitation can be explained by an extension of the phase oscillator  model. As shown by Van Vreeswijk et al. (1994), replacement of instantaneous synaptic  events with ones described by the alpha function in (12.20) leads to counter-intuitive  predictions that depend upon the synaptic time constant: when rsyn is sufficiently large,  reciprocal inhibition causes synchrony, and mutual excitation causes anti-phase locking.  All these aspects of the mathematical analysis were finally applied to the LGN-PGN  network and shown to predict the synchronized, PIR-driven bursting that is actually  observed in slow wave sleep. The model developed here is similar in spirit to several in the  literature (Wang and Rinzel, 1993; Destexhe et ai, 1993, 1994). It is interesting that  similar synchronized bursting occurs in epileptic episodes known as absence seizures. The  surprising conclusion is that these seizures might best be controlled by reducing the  strength of reciprocal inhibition in thalamic networks (Gloor and Fariello, 1988; Crunelli  andLeresche, 1991; Steriade et al, 1993; Kim et al, 1997).  12.7  Exercises  1. Use the program EPEPinteractions.m to determine the characteristics of phase locking  when the two neurons are stimulated by currents I\ =0.5 and I2 = 0.4. (a) Determine the  Synapses and synchrony  203  spike rates of both neurons for coupling strengths k = 0,4, 6. Also estimate the phase lag  in each of these cases, (b) Determine the smallest value of k (accurate to 0.1) that is just 