(15.4)  at  ax1  This equation states that the rate of change of C in time is equal to K times the second  derivative of its change with position along the cylinder minus the rate of loss by leakage  through the membrane.  In describing dendrites, we generally deal with the membrane potential V rather than  the ionic concentrations that produce that potential. Furthermore, it is conventional to  divide through by M so that (15.4) assumes the form:  8V  ,d2V  dt  ox- D2f-f-V  (15.5)  In this form, known as the cable equation, r is a time constant and D is a constant termed  the length constant for reasons that will be apparent shortly. The dependence of D on  dendritic radius R is easy to derive from the following simple considerations. The pro- portionality constant K of the flux term in (15.1) and (15.4) will vary directly with the  cross-sectional area of the cylinder: K = g\irR2, where R is the dendritic radius andg, is the  conductance inside the cylinder. Loss through the membrane, determined by the constant  M, will be proportional to cylinder circumference: M = gm2irR, where gm is the leakage  conductance through the membrane. Because D = ^/(K/M), it follows that:  (15.6)  Thus, the length constant increases with the square root of dendritic radius R.  15.2 Steady state solution  Although the cable equation (15.5) is a partial differential equation involving both x and ?  as independent variables, it can be solved exactly using the techniques developed in  studying ordinary linear differential equations. The first step in solving ordinary differ- ential equations is to determine the steady states by equating all time derivatives to zero.  254  Spikes, decisions, and actions  The same approach can be used to obtain the steady state behavior of the cable equation.  Setting dV /dt = 0 in (15.5) produces the equation:  D2%K-V=0  (15.7)  d.v- Note that the derivative with respect to x is now an ordinary derivative rather than a  partial derivative, because V is independent of ? in the steady state. Equation (15.7) is  simply a second order linear differential equation which can be solved by finding the  eigenvalues (Fheorem 2) with the result:  V=At-x/D  + Bex/D  (15.8)  The constants A and B must be chosen to satisfy the boundary conditions for the cable  equation. Boundary conditions are the spatial analog of initial conditions in time, as  boundary conditions specify the values of V (or its spatial derivatives) at the ends  (boundaries) of the cylinder along which diffusion is occurring. For the present, let us  assume that the potential is maintained constant at A = 0 so that F(0) = VQ. Assuming  that the cylinder is very long with respect to D, which effectively means that it is .onger  than about 5/J, there is little loss of accuracy if it is treated as effectively infinite. The  second boundary condition will then be F(oo) =0. and (15.8) becomes:  V=V0e-x'D  (15.9)  Fhis solution to the cable equation (15.5) reveals why D is referred to as a length constant.  D plays the same role with respect to space in the solution as a time constant does in the  solution of an ordinary linear differential equation: ('decays to 1/e of its maximum at  A = D.  One of Rail's (1962, 1989) major contributions to the theory of dendritic potentials was  to derive conditions under which a complex dendritic tree could be represented as a single  equivalent cylinder. The complexity of dendritic trees arises because dendritic segments  closer to the cell body (proximal dendrites) split at intervals into several smaller daughter  dendritic segments as illustrated schematically in Fig. 15.2. Let us consider a point at  which two daughter dendrites with radii of r\ and rejoin a parent dendrite of radius/?, as  depicted in Fig. 15.2B. Rail's insight was to realize that if the flux of a diffusing ion was  conserved at such dendritic junctions, then the daughter dendritic cylinders could be  collapsed into a single cylinder of the same radius as the parent dendrite. Using the  definition of flux in (15.1) in the limit as A.v —» 0 and the steady state equation for V in  (15.9), the flux through the end of the parent dendrite is:  Kfx = - l V 