ing exciting and to seek understanding. Two former professors at my alma mater, Wesleyan  Preface  ix  University, deserve special mention. Tom Tashiro, a Shakespearian scholar, taught me about  the relationship between data and theory through historical examples. Gilbert Burford,  Professor of Physical Chemistry, showed me how rich and elegant the interplay between  mathematics and science could be. At The University of Chicago, Stuart Rice, my thesis  advisor, and Jack Cowan, my postdoctoral mentor, are the two individuals responsible for  introducing me to mathematical approaches in biology and neuroscience. I am particularly  grateful to Jack Cowan for introducing me to mathematical theories of neural functions, thus  setting me on the career path I have followed since. I am indebted to Suzanne Weaver Smith  from the University of Kentucky and to my lifelong friend Bob Morris from the University  of Massachusetts for reading substantial portions of the book and providing invaluable feed- back. Thanks are also due to Tony Marley of the McGill University Psychology Department  for providing me with a very hospitable sabbatical environment in 1995-1996 during which  this book was begun. The development of this book has benefitted from comments and ques- tions by many former students involved with my nonlinear dynamics course over the years at  The University of Chicago. Among these are Michael Hines, Jim Bergen, Bard Ermentrout,  Charlie Smith, Bill Swanson, Sidney Lehky, Jeounghoon Kim, and Li-Ming Lin.  Finally, my deepest gratitude goes to my wife, Frances Wilkinson of McGill University, to  whom this book is dedicated. I could never have succeeded in such a prolonged writing  enterprise without her support, encouragement, and critical comments as work progressed.  Chicago  H.R.W.  1998  Contents  1 Introduction  1  2 First order linear differential equations  13  3 Two-dimensional systems and state space  28  4 Higher dimensional linear systems  48  5 Approximation and simulation  60  6 Nonlinear neurodynamics and bifurcations  72  7 Computation by excitatory and inhibitory networks  88  8 Nonlinear oscillations  116  9 Action potentials and limit cycles  136  10 Neural adaptation and bursting  156  11 Neural chaos  173  12 Synapses and synchrony  186  13 Swimming and traveling waves  205  14 Lyapunov functions and memory  223  15 Diffusion and dendrites  251  16 Nonlinear dynamics and brain function  279  Appendix: MatLab™ and the MatLab scripts  287  References  291  Index  303  1  Introduction  1.1 Nonlinear dynamics in neuroscience  The nervous system of all higher animals is inherently both highly complex and highly  nonlinear. The complexity is most obvious from consideration of the enormous number  of neurons and synapses in the brain: the human brain is comprised of approximately  1012 neurons and over 1015 synapses! Brain nonlinearity becomes evident from equally  striking observations. Nerve cells have a threshold for producing spikes or action  potentials, the fundamental events of almost all neural signaling. Thus, weak stimu- lation has no effect yet several weak stimuli together produce a dramatic spike  response. To cite another example, changing from a walk to a trot or gallop requires  switching among dynamical modes (switching gears) in a nonlinear motor control  network. More generally, all higher nervous systems make decisions between alter- native courses of action, and decision making is an inherently nonlinear process. We do  not act upon the average among alternatives; we act upon the winner among competing  alternatives. Spikes, decisions, and actions is an exploration of the nonlinear math- ematical principles by which brains generate spikes, make decisions, store memories,  and control actions.  Despite the enormous complexity of the brain, a major goal of neuroscience (and  indeed all science) is to understand and predict change: changes in neural firing rates  caused by altered ionic concentrations; changes in behavior resulting from altered  neural activity. Dynamics is the name given to the mathematics devoted to studying  change, to predicting the future given knowledge of the present. The foundation of  dynamics is the differential equation. Differential equations are based on a simple  concept: knowledge of the present state of a system can be used to predict how it will  evolve during the next instant of time. By repeating this predictive process from instant  to instant, differential equations permit us to build up a picture of the future behavior  of any system.  The motivation for introducing the neuroscientist to nonlinear dynamics should now  be clear: it is the most powerful analytic tool available to us for understanding and pre-