explanation was presented in eqns (7.26) to (7.30). The two-dimensional generalization of  (7.30) will contain products of terms in the spatial frequencies related to the .Y and y  coordinates. Thus, two-dimensional steady states can be periodic in both x and v  dimensions at once. The various alternatives may be observed by running the MatLab  script Hallucinations.m. which introduces brief, noisy stimuli to trigger various parallel  activation patterns in a small (64 x 64) generalization of (7.22). These would cause per- ception of concentric circles, radial spokes, and spirals. The program also demonstrates  that the network can be triggered into a steady state consisting of roughly equally spaced  circular patches of neural activity. Such patterns are the cortical correlate of a halluci- nated checkerboard. (The similarity of these neural patterns to tiger stripes and leopard  spots is not accidental: Murray (1989) has shown that similar dynamical principles  114  Spikes, decisions, and actions  Retinal Image  Cortical Representation  77  D  10°  20°  Fig. 7.16  Retino-cortical mapping in the human visual system (after Schwartz, 1980 and Hortonand Hoyt.  1991). The right half of each retinal image maps to the right visual cortex as shown. Thus, concentric circles  A-D map into almost parallel vertical lines, while radii E-G map into almost parallel horizontal lines.  Parallel lines of cortical activity during hallucinations, simulated in Hallucinations.m. would thus be perceived  as circles or radial spokes, depending on orientation.  mediated by diffusion produce the patterns on animal coats.) Ermentrout (1998) provides  a more detailed summary of theoretical work on visual hallucinations.  This chapter has explored some of the richness and complexity of neural networks  involving various combinations of recurrent excitation and recurrent inhibition. Such  networks can accomplish vector summation, light adaptation, make perceptual deci- sions, and provide plausible models of short-term memory. The general theme of such  networks is that short-range recurrent excitation must be balanced by longer range  recurrent inhibition. Furthermore, networks that are imbalanced for their appropriate  task, typically in the direction of excessive excitability (or equivalently reduced inhib- ition), provide important models of such neurological states as epilepsy and drug-induced  hallucinations. Current research trends are to further embellish excitatory-inhibitory  networks by introducing multiple subpopulations of E and / neurons. As one example,  Somers et al. (1998) have developed a network model of orientation tuning in visual  cortex that incorporates selective long-range excitatory connections among neurons with  similar orientation tuning in addition to the local excitatory and longer range inhibitory  interconnections embodied in the Wilson-Cowan (1973) equations. In the following  Computation by excitatory and inhibitory networks  115  chapters, interactions between positive and negative feedback, whether from excitatory  and inhibitory neurons or from different ionic currents, will be shown to produce a  complex array of nonlinear neural oscillations and traveling waves.  7.6 Exercises  1. Write down the 5 x 5 Jacobian (omit the equation for dG/dt) for the retinal model in  (7.13). Solve for the steady state and obtain the eigenvalues using MatLab for L= 1, 10,  100, 1000. Does the nature of the singularity (spiral, node, saddle, etc.) change with light  intensity?  2. In the text it is proved that (7.6) with E» given by (7.4) is identical to the vector sum  direction. Prove that max(Fn) is the length of the resultant vector.  3. The vector summation network (7.5) can produce either one or two responses to signal  coherent or transparent motion. Use the program VectorWTA.m to determine the largest  angle (in whole degrees) between two vectors, each of length 10, that will produce a single  response peak. Call this angle 0max. Now remove the comment in the program so that you  can stimulate with three vectors, all of length 10. Let the angles of two vectors be ± 1.20max,  so that these two vectors alone would produce two peaks in the response. What is the  response if the third vector is at 0°? Can you formulate a general rule determining whether  one or two responses will occur?  4. To see that light adaptation postpones the onset of ganglion cell saturation, perform  the following simulations using Retina.m. First, let the background L= 10 and determine 