stability of an equilibrium point, there will always be a value oft for which U in Theorem  14 is a Lyapunov function in a region surrounding the singularity, an observation  explored in the problems. Theorem 14 can also be generalized to higher dimensional  systems, but the number of coefficients analogous to s grows rapidly.  14.4 Conservative systems and predator-prey interactions  Nonlinear dynamical systems in neuroscience possess equilibrium points that are either  asymptotically stable or else unstable in virtually all cases. In theoretical physics, how- ever, enormously important insights have been obtained through application of the law of  conservation of energy, which was discovered by the same Helmholtz who is famous for  his pioneering research into visual and auditory function (Helmholtz. 1909). The law of  conservation of energy simply states that the energy (a state function) of an isolated  physical system will remain constant as the system evolves in time according to Newton's  laws of motion. Conservation of energy is first of all an idealization, as it requires that the  energy conserving system be totally isolated from all external forces. In the limit, there- fore, only the universe as a whole conserves energy. Second of all, conservation of energy  represents only a small subset of nonlinear dynamical systems that conserve more general  quantities. For mathematical completeness, and because of its intellectual importance  and elegance, therefore, this section will provide a brief examination of conservative  dynamics, which may be viewed as a special or limiting case of Lyapunov function theory.  Although conservative systems have not played a major role in biological or neural  theory, there are nevertheless several elegant and interesting examples that deserve  mention. Cowan (1970) developed a conservative formulation of interactions between  excitatory and inhibitory neurons, while Goodwin (1963) produced an analogous  Lyapunov functions and memory  233  conservative formulation for the oscillations inherent in cellular biophysics. Rather than  developing these examples here, however, let us explore the original example of a con- servative biological system: the Lotka-Volterra equations (Lotka, 1924). The equations  will be developed here using Volterra's description of predator-prey interactions. Let us  assume that a population of wolves, W, survives by catching and eating rabbits, R, on an  isolated island (such as Isle Royale National Park). The rabbits, being herbivores, are  assumed to multiply exponentially in the absence of predation by the wolves. The wolves,  on the other hand, will die out exponentially if there are no rabbits to eat. Assume that the  frequency of wolves encountering and eating rabbits is proportional to the product of  their populations RW. Fhen the following equations will describe the population  dynamics:  6R  1  0.5—= R  RW  d'  2°  (14.18)  dW  1  0 . 1 - - =  -W+-—RW  d?  500  The time constants here are in years and have been chosen to produce equilibrium values  in a reasonable range. They indicate that it takes roughly 20 wolf-rabbit encounters to  produce a rabbit kill but about 500 rabbit encounters to provide enough protein (coniglio  alia cacciatori!) to enable the wolves to reproduce.  Analysis of the Lotka-Volterra equations (14.18) indicates that the steady states are  R = 0, W=0, and R = 500, IF =20. The former represents the case where both species  have died out, while the latter represents the only equilibrium balance between predators  and prey. The Jacobian of (14.18) shows that (0, 0) is an unstable saddle point, but (500,  20) produces a pair of pure imaginary eigenvalues. Thus, Theorem 8 tells us nothing about  the stability of R = 500, W= 20, and we must turn to Lyapunov function theory. In this  case Theorem 14 does not work (try it if you are skeptical), but eqn (14.18) has a particular  property that will enable us to derive a positive definite state function directly. To develop  this method, note first that the right side of each equation in (14.18) can be written as a  product of a function of A and a different function of v. A general form of which (14.18) is  a particular example is therefore:  ~ = Fx(x)Fv(y)  2  (14.19)  -£ = Gv(.v)G, (.v)  If the second equation here is divided by the first, the following relationship is determined  between dv and d.x along trajectories: 