powerful /AHP current in the lamprey oscillator. The importance of recurrent excitation  for the lamprey oscillator can be seen by again running Lamprey.m with Ginhib = 0 to  uncouple the left and right sides. If the strength of recurrent excitation is reduced by  setting the program variable EE = 2, the limit cycle vanishes, and the system decays to an  asymptotically stable steady state.  As each side of the lamprey oscillator is capable of independent oscillation, what then is  the role of the crossed inhibition mediated by the C neurons in (13.1)? Basically there are  two answers. First, when the two sides are coupled via C neuron crossed inhibition, the  sides burst out of phase, which is necessary for the motor control of swimming. Such  antiphase locking between interacting oscillators was analyzed in the previous chapter.  Second, the crossed C cell inhibition does extend the upper end of the dynamic range from  about A = 17 to A = 24. This is explained by the observation in Chapter 8 that mutually  inhibitory neurons with /AHP currents can generate alternating bursts of activity even in  the absence of explicit recurrent excitation (see Fig. 8.11).  Fhe effect of serotonin (5-HT) in controlling burst frequency is the final element of  lamprey central pattern generation. Harris-Warrick and Cohen (1985) demonstrated that  serotonin modulates the swimming frequency in the isolated lamprey spinal cord over  about a tenfold range. If the Lamprey.m simulation is repeated for 2 < A < 24 the burst  frequency curve plotted as a solid line in Fig. 13.3 will be obtained. This range from about  0.5 to 10.0 Hz is the frequency range of bursting observed in the isolated lamprey spinal  cord (Wallen et ai, 1992; Hellgren et ai, 1992). Above this range both the experimental  preparation and the model in (13.1) generate steady firing behavior rather than bursting.  In the model this is due to a supercritical Hopf bifurcation. The onset of bursting at low  stimulus levels, however, occurs at a saddle-node bifurcation, which permits the bursts to  be initiated with large amplitude and low frequency.  What is the physiological basis for the almost linear relationship between stimulus  intensity A and burst frequency? Lansner et al. (1997) have argued cogently that it is  due to modulation of the /AHP currents by serotonin. Lansner et al. (1997) suggest that  1 o  8  6  4  2  1 0  15  Stimulus A  Fig. 13.3 Burst frequencies produced by (13.1) for a range of stimulus values A. Blocking serotonin prevents  the network from generating higher frequency bursts.  Swimming and traveling waves  211  serotonin-secreting neurons bathe the lamprey network at low stimulus intensities,  thereby producing a relatively slow and weak /AHP current. At higher stimulus levels,  however, serotonin release is inhibited by the stimulus, which results in stronger and faster  /AHP currents. This is shown diagrammatically in Fig. 13.2A, where the brainstem com- mand neuron A inhibits the serotonin releasing neuron S. The effects of serotonin on  (13.1) are simulated by varying the /AHP current parameters TH and g as functions of the  stimulus level A according to the formulas:  g = 6 + (0.09 + A)2  400  (13.3)  T H  \ + (0.2 + A)2  These relationships result in an increase in the gain g and a decrease in the time constant TH  of the /AHP current as A increases, which produces the burst frequency modulation results  of the Lansner et al. (1997) network model. To see the effects of blocking serotonin  modulation of the network, set the variable HT5 = 0 in Lamprey.m, and run the program  for a range of stimuli A. The burst frequency is now almost constant as shown by the  dashed line in Fig. 13.3.  The lamprey segmental oscillator embodies a number of basic neural principles. As  exemplified by the Lansner et al. (1997) model, each half of the segmental oscillator will  burst as a result of two factors: recurrent excitation initiates the burst, while spike fre- quency adaptation produced by the /AHP current terminates it. Antiphase oscillations of  the left and right sides are produced by the crossed C neuron inhibition. Finally, burst  frequency increases with command neuron activation because serotonin modulation of  the /AHP current is reduced by command neuron inhibition. Thus, an interplay among 