equilibrium state by setting T = Dm (7.1). Taking FT = 80, o = 120, and k = 3, the first  equation in (7.1) reduces to the following expression for a steady state in which all  responses are equal:  100(80 -3NT)2,  0  (7.2)  1202 + (80-3A'F);  This can be solved for N = 1,2,4, etc. using the fzero function in MatLab with the  results: T= 11.9 for N = 1; T = 7.6 for N = 2; and T = 4.5 for N = 8. Indeed, reflection  on the form of (7.2) indicates that the value of T at equilibrium must decrease as N  increases in order for the input to just balance the recurrent inhibition.  Linearization of (7.1) around any of the steady states where T « D gives:  dt\DJ  T\S'Nk  -l-(N-l)S'kJ\Dj  {  '  where S' is the derivative of the Naka-Rushton function evaluated at the steady state. The  eigenvalues of (7.3) are A = S'k - 1 and A = -NS'k - 1. As N, S', and k are all > 0, the  equilibrium will be a saddle point so long as S'k > 1. The equilibrium state of (7.1) in  which the T neuron fires at rate Feq and all D neurons are suppressed will be asymp- totically stable so long as kTeq > F D, a condition guaranteeing that all distractor  responses will drop to zero. Thus, the WTA network will implement neural decisions as  long as the inhibitory strength k is sufficiently large and the inputs are strong enough so  that S' is large enough to produce a saddle point.  Given conditions producing a saddle point in the state space, it is now possible to see  why WTA network latency increases with the number of distractors A as shown in Fig. 7.2  and in visual search data. Recall that the eigenvalues of (7.3) are A = S'k - 1 and  A = -NS'k - 1 at the saddle point. In addition, solution of (7.2) showed that the values of  Tand D at the saddle point decrease as Aincreases. This in turn causes 5" to decrease once  values of Fand D at the saddle point fall below the point of maximum slope of the Naka- Rushton function (0.58cr in this case). Accordingly, the positive exponent in the vicinity of  the saddle point will decrease as N increases, and this will cause trajectories to diverge  92  Spikes, decisions, and actions  from the saddle point more slowly. Thus, increasing latencies in WTA networks result  from a saddle point that occurs closer to the origin and therefore has a reduced positive  exponent as the number of distractors N increases.  One final point about WTA networks: there are generally A additional equilibria that  are asymptotically stable: ones in which one D neuron is active and all other activity is  suppressed. (This assumes distractor input is not much weaker than target input.) If the  WTA network is initially in the resting state where T= D = 0, however, the only state that  can be reached under conditions producing a saddle point is the state in which the most  strongly stimulated neuron is active and all others are inhibited. Once a winner has  suppressed other activity, however, the network exhibits hysteresis, and emergence of a  new winner requires a greater than normal input.  These properties of decisions implemented by WTA networks reflect properties of  higher level cognitive decisions. It is common experience that decisions are more difficult  and take longer when the number of appealing alternatives increases. Once a decision is  definitively made, however, humans invariably exhibit more or less resistance to a change  of mind and generally require more evidence to do so: we all exhibit hysteresis in our  cognitive processes!  7.2  Vector summation  Although we rarely engage in vector summation consciously unless forced to do so in a  math course, vertebrate brains are confronted with vector summation problems all the  time. For example, it is crucial for your somatosensory system to have information about  the location of your hands and feet at all times, yet the information sent to the brain from  receptors in the muscles and joints effectively indicates only the angles of the joints  (Rothwell, 1994). The only way in which the position of your hand or foot can be 