stimulated. Compare with data in Fig. 15.8.  The four-compartment model described by (15.46) and (15.47) comprises just eight  differential equations and has been implemented in MatLab script ActiveDendrite.m.  As shown in the inset in Fig. 15.7, the model may be stimulated via current injection either  into the soma or into the most distal dendritic compartment. In both cases the current  strength is / = 0.45 nA, and the current step lasts 23 ms. Results following stimulation of  the soma are plotted in the top panel of Fig. 15.7, where the two curves show potential at  the soma (V\) and in the distal dendritic compartment (F4). In this case an action  potential is first elicited in the soma, and it subsequently propagates back up the dendrite,  reaching the distal compartment 1.16 ms later. In agreement with experimental data  reproduced in Fig. 15.8 (Stuart and Sakmann, 1994), the dendritic spike has dropped in  amplitude to about 64% of that triggered in the soma. These figures for attenuation and  latency are typically found at a distance of about 225 pm from the soma (Stuart and  Sakmann, 1994), so setting the length of each model dendritic compartment to about  75 urn produces good agreement with the data.  A more surprising result occurs when the distal dendrite rather than the soma is sti- mulated. In this case, depicted in the bottom panel of Fig. 15.7, the distal dendritic  compartment depolarizes first, but it reaches a plateau, and the action potential is again  generated first at the soma. This somatic spike then propagates back along the dendrite  Diffusion and dendrites  Somatic current pulse  soma  271  Dendritic current pulse  soma  / ^  25 mV  10 ms  Fig. 15.8 Responses of a neocortical neuron to stimulation of the soma (top) or distal dendrite (bottom).  Data reproduced with permission from Stuart and Sakman (1994), copyright Macmillan Magazines Ltd.  Compare with simulation results in the previous figure.  producing a subsequent dendritic spike. Thus, spikes are always generated at the soma  (or axon hillock) regardless of where the neuron receives a depolarizing input. As shown  in the bottom panel of Fig. 15.8, this is also true for neocortical neurons (Stuart and  Sakmann, 1994). This counter-intuitive behavior results from the much lower Na+ and  K conductances in the dendrites relative to the soma. When current is injected into the  dendritic compartment, conduction along the dendrite occurs too rapidly for the low Na+  conductance to generate sufficient additional current to trigger a spike. Stimulation of the  soma, however, produces a large Na+ conductance increase sufficient to trigger a spike,  and this in turn triggers spikes in the successive dendritic compartments, albeit with  attenuated amplitudes.  To demonstrate the importance of dendritic Na channels in boosting the amplitude of  spikes propagated back from the soma, it is possible to simulate effects of TTX appli- cation to the dendritic compartments as was done in Chapter 10. This results in a decrease  in the amplitude of the dendritic F4 potential propagated from the soma by about 33%,  which is similar to the decrease observed with experimental TTX application by Stuart  and Sakmann (1994).  In addition to elucidating the nature of dendritic spike propagation, this example  demonstrates the theoretical importance of compartmental models. A single com- partment or equipotential neuron obviously could not provide any insight into ampli- tude attenuation of dendritic spikes. The fundamental conceptual importance of  272  Spikes, decisions, and actions  compartmental models thus emerges when there are different nonlinear ion currents in  different parts of the neuron, typically the soma and dendrite. In this case the separation  of channels into different compartments becomes a fundamental factor in the nonlinear  dynamics and emergent physiology of the cell.  15.8 Plateau potentials and bistability  The previous section demonstrated that compartmental models are crucial for under- standing certain aspects of single-cell physiology. Four compartments were used in the  active dendrite model, and these provide results in reasonable agreement with the data of  Stuart and Sakmann (1994) in Fig. 15.8 and with the 275-compartment model of Mainen  et al. (1995). If the fundamental dynamical significance of compartmental models is  indeed the separation of different ionic currents into different parts of the neuron, then it 