Wilfrid Rail (1962, 1967, 1989), who pioneered the study of postsynaptic potential pro- pagation through electrically passive dendritic trees. Most recently, the recognition that  many processes in dendrites are inherently active and nonlinear has resulted in the  development of compartmental models of dendrites (see Segev et ai, 1989). Compart- mental models represent approximations to nonlinear diffusion processes in dendrites.  15.1 Derivation of the diffusion equation  To derive the diffusion equation, suppose that there is some chemical species whose  concentration C varies with both position and time. Furthermore, let us assume that this  chemical is confined within a very long, thin cylinder so that C effectively varies only with  the distance x along the cylinder. Thus, the concentration will be a function of A and ?. In  order to derive an equation for the spatio-temporal variation of C(x, ?), let us focus on  Fig. 15.1. Here a section of the thin cylinder within which diffusion occurs has been  divided into three adjacent compartments, each of length Ax. Focusing on the center  252  Spikes, decisions, and actions  C(x-Ax, t)  C(x, t)  C(x+Ax, t)  FL  FR  Fig. 15.1 Schematic of three adjacent compartments in a long, thin cylinder along which a substance with  concentration C(.v, t) is diffusing. FL and FR represent fluxes into the center compartment from the adjacent  ones.  compartment, it is clear that the chemical can flow across both the left and right  boundaries, thereby altering the local concentration, C(x, 1). The technical term for the  rate of flow across a boundary is flux, and the two fluxes will be denoted by FE and FR. It  has been established empirically that the flux between neighboring compartments in a  cylinder is directly proportional to the concentration difference, with the diffusing  chemical flowing from the higher concentration to the lower. Moreover, the flux is  inversely proportional to the distance Ax over which the concentration difference occurs.  Putting these empirical results together gives us the following:  ^C(x +  Ax,t)-C(x,t)  TR = A  T  A'v  (15 1)  ^ C ( A , ? ) - C ( A - - A A - , ? )  ry = - A  A.v  where Ais the diffusion constant. The second equation has a minus sign, because flow into  the center segment will only occur if C(x — Ax, t) > C(x, ?). Intuitively, the flux will  increase as the cross-sectional area of the cylinder increases, so A'will be proportional to  this area. The net change in concentration C(x, t) due to flux within the cylinder is the sum  of the two fluxes in (15.1).  In addition to the changes in C(x, t) that are produced by flux within the cylinder, some  of the diffusing ions may leak out of the cylinder through the membrane. Within the ith  compartment of the cylinder, the amount that will leak through the membrane will be  proportional to Cand to the length of each compartment A.v (because membrane surface  area depends on A.v). To complete derivation of the diffusion equation, it is only  necessary to combine the effects of flux and loss through the membrane. As C(x, t) is a  concentration variable, its rate of change will depend on the total amount of chemical in  the compartment, which is A.v C(x, ?), so:  A.v — = FR + FL - Ax MC  (15.2)  ot  In this equation 8C/dt indicates that this is a partial derivative with respect to ?. As A.r  is independent of I, it is treated as a constant with respect to the ? differentiation. Thus,  eqn (15.2) states that the rate of change of concentration in the /th compartment is the sum  Diffusion and dendrites  253  of the fluxes across the compartment boundaries minus the quantity lost through the  membrane. Combination of (15.1) and (15.2) gives:  dC _ K  ~dt~ Ax  C(x + A.v, ?) - C(x, t)  C(x, t) - C(x - A.v, ?)  A.v  A.v  - MC  (15.3)  In the limit as A.v —> 0, the expression in square brackets becomes the difference of two  derivatives taken at adjacent spatial points. As this difference is divided by A.v, this limit  becomes the derivative of a derivative, which is the second derivative. Thus, we have  derived the diffusion equation, which is:  d^ = K^-MC 