this node through which all trajectories enter. Theorem 10 can be used to prove the  existence of an asymptotically stable limit cycle. To construct this boundary, begin at  point 1 on the dR/dt = 0 isocline in Fig. 8.7, which need only be chosen at an adequately  large Lvalue (I•'= 3 in this instance). Next, draw a horizontal line until it intersects the d 1'  d? = 0 isocline at point 2. From (8.8), all trajectories must cross this line moving down- ward and to the left, as d V/dt < 0 and dR/dt < 0 in this region of state space. Now draw  Nonlinear oscillati  125  dR/dt = 0  - 3 - 2 - 1 0 1 2 3  V  Fig. 8.7 Phase plane for FitzHugh-Nagumo equations (8.8) with isoclines (8.9) for /mpu, = 1.5. Dashed  rectangle 1234 is the outer boundary of an annulus satisfying the Poincare-Bendixon theorem. As illustrated  by the arrows, all trajectories crossing the boundary of this rectangle enter it.  a vertical line down to the intersection with the dR/dt = 0 isocline at point 3. Again (8.8)  shows that all trajectories must cross this boundary moving diagonally downward to the  right, because dV/dt > 0 and dR/dt < 0 in this region. Similar reasoning shows that the  horizontal line 3^1, drawn so that point 4 lies directly below point 1, will be crossed by  trajectories moving diagonally upward into the rectangle. One repeats this procedure with  the vertical line from 4 to 1 and finds that all trajectories cross moving toward the upper  left. This completes our proof of the existence of an asymptotically stable limit cycle in  (8.8), as all trajectories enter the region defined by the rectangle 1-2-3-4-1, and all leave  the neighborhood of the unstable steady state.  To explore the FitzHugh-Nagumo limit cycle further, it is necessary to simulate (8.8)  using the Runge-Kutta method. Running the script FitzHugh.m with /input = 1.5 produces  the series of simulated action potentials shown in Fig. 8.8. You can also verify that /= 0.5  is subthreshold, as no action potentials are generated. Comparing Fig. 8.8 with responses  from the Hodgkin-Huxley equations depicted in Fig. 9.1 and 9.3 of the next chapter  shows that (8.8) does not provide a very accurate description of action potential shapes.  Nevertheless, the FitzHugh-Nagumo equations provide mathematical insight into the  nature of neuronal excitability, namely that spikes are generated when /mput becomes  strong enough to destabilize the equilibrium state (see Exercises).  8.4 Hopf bifurcations  Theorems 9 and 10 provide us with powerful means to determine whether limit  cycles exist in a nonlinear system. Unfortunately, however, both theorems are limited to  two-dimensional systems and do not apply when more than two neurons or two ion flows  126  Spikes, decisions, and actions  •|||||[  5  10  15  Time (ms)  2 0  Fig. 8.8  Action potentials ('(') produced by the FitzHugh-Nagumo equations (8.8) for /,npilt = 1.5.  are involved. Theorem 9 does not generalize to higher dimensions, because a closed  trajectory defining a limit cycle oscillation cannot be said to enclose equilibrium points in  three or more dimensions in any meaningful sense. One might think at first that the  Poincare-Bendixon theorem (Theorem 10) would generalize to higher dimensions if  instead of specifying an annulus into which trajectories flow, one specified a solid  'doughnut' shape in three dimensions or a 'hyper-doughnut' in higher dimensional sys- tems. However, such a ploy also fails to guarantee the existence of a limit cycle, because  trajectories need not be closed to avoid crossing in higher dimensions. This means that a  trajectory might remain within the doughnut but be chaotic (see Chapter 11) rather than  being a limit cycle oscillation. Fortunately, there is one powerful theorem that applies to a  system with any number of dimensions from two up, the Hopf bifurcation theorem.  Theorem 11 (Hopf bifurcation theorem): Consider a nonlinear dynamical system 