bursting during Clione swimming? The key to the answer lies in the fact that Hodgkin- Huxley type neurons described by eqn (9.7) have been used in this simulation. These  equations have been coupled by adding the two synaptic conductance equations from  (12.18) to each:  %= — (-f+Hslep(vpre-n))  dt  T-Syn  d?  r s y n  [12.19)  where  u  i \ - I l  if -Y > °  > W A ) - j n  i f j c< Q  In addition, the synaptic current term -g( V - £syn) with £syn = -0.92 has been added to  the dV/dt equation in (9.7). Fhe mechanism underlying Clione swimming can now be  obtained from an examination of the phase plane for eqn (9.7). First, however, let us  observe another surprising phenomenon: if you use a hyperpolarizing stimulus of -0.2  with an inhibitory gain of k = 9, Clione.m will again generate an ongoing swimming  rhythm, and this has also been observed experimentally (Satterlie, 1985)! This provides  the key to understanding the mechanism of rhythm generation. If the neurons are  uncoupled by setting k = 0, a hyperpolarizing stimulus of -0.2 will produce one spike  following termination of the hyperpolarization, as shown in Fig. 12.3A. As indicated,  there is a postinhibitory rebound (PIR) of the membrane potential following hyperpo- larization. Spike generation via PIR can be understood by examining the phase plane for  (9.7). As shown in Fig. 12.3B, the hyperpolarizing stimulus depresses the dF/d? = 0 iso- cline (only a portion of which is shown) so that the asymptotically stable resting state R is  shifted downward to the hyperpolarized point H. As all equilibria between R and H are  asymptotically stable, V simply drops to the value at H. When the hyperpolarization is  abruptly terminated, the equilibrium point immediately jumps back to R, but the system  trajectory is still at H. As this is a region of the phase space where d V/dt is very large but  dR/dt = 0, the trajectory must move in the direction indicated by the arrow, thus gen- erating one spike before returning to rest at R. This is the explanation of PIR spike  generation in (9.7). Postinhibitory rebound in the squid axon was described by Hodgkin  and Huxley (1952) under the rubric anode break excitation.  The explanation of the Clione swimming rhythm should now be clear. Each time one  neuron spikes, the brief hyperpolarizing IPSP in the other cell (arrows in Fig. 12.2B)  Synapses and synchrony  195  50  >  E  -50  -100  PIR  s—y  \  A  u——  10  Time (ms)  0 6  0 4  0 2  dV/dt =  I **"  W/  0  -A  /  dR/dt  ---^=*^  Trajectory  = 0  - —  B  -0.5  0 5  V  Fig. 12.3 Initiation of a spike in (9.7) via postinhibitory rebound (PIR). The phase plane in B shows that  hyperpolarization shifts the equilibrium state from R to H. so a sudden shift of the equilibrium back to R  produces the system trajectory shown.  results in postinhibitory rebound, which generates a spike, so the process repeats itself. In  order to generate PIR, it is crucial that the IPSP be brief in duration and sufficiently  strong, as otherwise the hyperpolarized cell will simply track the slowly moving equili- brium point (which is always asymptotically stable in this case) back to rest. In Clione,  each IPSP is of about the same duration as each spike (100 ms), so the simulation of Clione  has an inhibitory time constant rsyn = 1.0 ms, the duration of spikes produced by (9.7). If  the value is changed to rsyn = 1.5 ms and Clione.m is rerun with k = 9, no rhythm can be  generated at any stimulus intensity, because trajectories simply track the asymptotically  stable equilibrium following stimulus termination. 