concepts. Even more striking, there were cases of verbal errors when the hand gesture was  nevertheless mathematically correct! Thus, the hand gestures represented a more accurate  reflection of mathematical thought than did words.  In sum, therefore, mathematical ability seems to rest on two fundamental aspects of  brain function. The simpler is a general appreciation of relative quantity, which is ubi- quitous in mammalian sensory perception. Our nascent understanding of deeper aspects  of mathematics indicates that they are localized in parietal association cortex. These  cortical areas, which combine visual and somatosensory information, are also involved in  vector computations related to eye-hand coordination, the perception of surfaces, and  perception of motion in depth. Such vector-based computations are both inherently  spatial and incorporate addition and subtraction as special cases. As these networks also  appear capable of categorical decision making (e.g. coherent versus transparent motion,  see Chapter 7), these cortical areas can create precise perceptual dichotomies. It is not  inconceivable that more abstract dichotomies, equal-unequal, true-false, might also  arise in such neural networks. Granted evolving capabilities to reflect consciously on  visually guided manipulation within peripersonal space, we can thus begin to envision  286  Spikes, decisions, and actions  (metaphor intended) the emergence of mathematical abilities in nonlinear dynamical  networks of the parietal cortex.  Understanding of mathematical ability and a great many other aspects of brain  function awaits decades of future research. This research will certainly be accompanied by  the development of more sophisticated mathematical tools for studying neural networks.  Nevertheless, I think it reasonable to suggest that the nonlinear dynamical principles  which will form the foundations of that understanding are largely available today.  Appendix: MatLab™ and the MatLab  scripts  This appendix contains a very short introduction on the use of MatLab™ to run the  simulations accompanying this book. It is assumed that the reader is already familiar with  MatLab basics, at least at the level of the tutorials provided in the MatLab manual. The  disk is readable by either Macintosh or Windows computers and contains two folders of  MatLab scripts: Mac MatLab, and WinMatLab. The scripts in the two folders are  identical except for a few differences in text formatting required by the two different  operating systems. The appropriate folder should be copied onto the reader's hard disk  so that all examples can be worked using these copies. That way, should you make any  changes that prevent the script from working properly, you can always make another  copy of the original. The disk with this book has been locked to prevent modification  of the original scripts. MatLab is also available to run under UNIX, but I have not  tested the scripts in a UNIX environment. Most scripts should run under the student  version of MatLab. However, several of the scripts later in the book may require vectors  longer than the student version permits. This was unavoidable in order to demonstrate  some points concerning more complex neural networks. Also, some of these scripts may  take several minutes to run even on a Macintosh G3. This was again unavoidable due to  the necessary size and length of certain simulations.  The MatLab scripts were created on a Macintosh and then translated using TransMac  under Windows NT. TransMac under Windows correctly maintains file name case and  length and properly translates end-of-line and end-of-file conventions. From Windows,  correctly configured contemporary copying mechanisms to and from UNIX all imple- ment these conventions correctly in both directions. These include Samba, modern ftp  clients, and modern zipping utilities, including gzip on the UNIX side and Winzip 7.0 on  the NT side. In translating the files for UNIX, it is crucial that file names and letter cases  be retained for the scripts to work properly.  Users of the WinMatLab directory on either Windows or UNIX may see directories  named Resource, frk and files named Finder.dat. These support the production of a single  diskette which can be read either by Macintosh or Windows machines, and may be safely  ignored in those environments. Note that many scripts produce several figures in different  windows, and each must be moved to the front for viewing (see MatLab manuals). Please  check the book web site http://spikes.bsd.uchicago.edu for current information con- cerning the MatLab scripts and to report any problems.  Each MatLab script is designed to be run by the reader to verify assertions at appro- priate points in the book. Following this, it is expected (and suggested at points in the text)  288  Spikes, decisions, and actions  that the reader will modify the scripts to solve problems at the end of chapters and  hopefully also to begin to explore neuroscience problems related to her/his own interests. 