expected that solutions can be characterized by their behavior near the origin. An  important concept here is that of a trajectory. A trajectory is the entire time course of the  solution of a differential equation from ? = 0 to ? = oo, given a particular initial condi- tion. Thus, any differential equation defines an infinite number of trajectories, each  corresponding to a different initial condition. Additionally, note that an equilibrium  point is itself a trajectory, since a trajectory starting at equilibrium must by definition  remain there for all eternity!  We may now define the concepts of stability, asymptotic stability, and instability of an  equilibrium point. An equilibrium point of a system of differential equations is asymp- totically stable if all trajectories starting within a region containing the equilibrium point  decay to that point exponentially as ? —• oo. Conversely, the equilibrium is unstable if at  least one trajectory beginning in a region containing the point leaves that region per- manently. Finally, an equilibrium is stable or neutrally stable if nearby trajectories remain  nearby as ? —» oo but do not approach asymptotically.  38  Spikes, decisions, and actions  Trajectories for second order differential equations may be conveniently plotted in a  two-dimensional space in which the variables of the equations define the axes. Such a  space is known as a state space or a phase space, terms that will be used interchangeably.  Analytical solution of the system equations yields explicit functions of?, such as C(t) and  //(?) in (3.24). If time is regarded as a parameter, then it is possible to plot the entire  course of each system trajectory as a curve in the phase space. Phase space plots reveal  the relationship between the variables at all points on the trajectory. Both the time  dependence of solutions and the phase space are plotted by LinearOrder2.m, and  experimentation with that program will provide a great deal of insight into the nature of  phase space trajectories. Note that the phase space plot contains arrows indicating the  local directions in which trajectories flow at various points in the space.  All possible solutions to the second order differential equation described in Theorem 2  may now be categorized and their phase space trajectories illustrated. From the fact that  the characteristic equation is quadratic with real coefficients, the two eigenvalues must  either both be real, both be pure imaginary, or else be a complex conjugate pair. The  possibilities are enumerated below, and typical equations are given along with solutions  for initial conditions A(0) = 1, v(0) = 1.  A spiral point results when the eigenvalues are a complex conjugate pair. Thus, the  solutions are in the form of exponentials multiplied by a sine and a cosine. The spiral point  is asymptotically stable if the real part of the eigenvalues is negative. A typical trajectory  of an asymptotically stable spiral point is plotted in the upper left of Fig. 3.3, which makes  Spiral Point  Saddle Pc  •  mt  XX  XX  Node  (cx>)  Center  Fig. 3.3 Typical phase plane trajectories for the four characteristic equilibrium points of linear dynamical  systems: spiral point, node, saddle point, and center. The horizontal and vertical axes represent the two  variables describing each system. Equilibrium points arc depicted by a dot in the center of each plot.  Trajectories illustrated for the spiral point and node are asymptotically stable. Saddle points are always  unstable, while centers are stable but not asymptotically stable.  Two-dimensional systems  39  clear that the trajectory is in fact a spiral. The following equation provides an example  of a system with an asymptotically stable spiral point:  d / ,  d? V.v  solution :  (3.25)  x(t) =e_2'cos(8?) -2e"2'sin(8?)  v(?) = e-2' cos(8?) + 0.5 e~2' sin(8?)  The equilibrium point is a node if the eigenvalues are both real and have the same sign.  The node is asymptotically stable if the eigenvalues are negative, and it is unstable if they  are positive. Typical trajectories at a node are plotted in Fig. 3.3, and an illustrative  example is:  , / N  / -2  4\  /  d fx\  /  \ I x  d? \yj  \ o  - 3 / V.v/  solution :  (3-26)  .\'(?) = 5 e - 2 ' - 4 e - 3 '  v(?)=e^'  A saddle point occurs when both eigenvalues are real but have opposite signs. Because 