- d?  so  •> dx  dv  1 d  2 2  ^  2 2  urx — + y — = - — (CJ-.Y- + r ) = -A-V'  8.16  d?  " d?  2 d?  The intermediate step in the last equation contains the expression (urx ± y2), which isjust  the formula for an ellipse. So we have shown that any such elliptical contour will change in  time by getting smaller, as the time derivative is negative (or zero on the axes). Therefore,  the nonlinear terms in (8.13) guarantee that trajectories will decay towards the origin for  0 = 0. When 3 > 0, the origin becomes an unstable spiral point, so trajectories must leave  its immediate vicinity. However, the nonlinear terms will still dominate far from the  origin, so an asymptotically stable limit cycle must exist at intermediate distances. The  technique used in (8.16) to determine the stability effect of nonlinear terms is a simple  application of Lyapunov functions, which will be developed more fully in Chapter 14.  The final point concerning Hopf bifurcations is the requirement that all roots of the  characteristic equation in more than two dimensions must have negative real parts at  0 = 0, except for the one pure imaginary pair. This means that trajectories of the multi- dimensional system will decay onto a two-dimensional subspace on which the remaining  requirements of Theorem 11 guarantee a limit cycle. This is easy to understand if (8.13) is  modified to make it into a very simple three-dimensional system:  d.v  d 7 = V  ^-=-u?x + y(0-x2)  (8.17)  The additional variable z obeys an equation independent of x and v for simplicity. If  k < 0, the third eigenvalue of (8.17) is negative, and z will just decay to zero, so an  asymptotically stable limit cycle will still exist in the x v plane. However, if k > 0, then  trajectories will move off to infinity in the z direction, so a limit cycle cannot exist.  In Chapter 6 we studied bifurcations where pairs of equilibrium points, one asymp- totically stable and one unstable (see Fig. 6.5), were created or destroyed. Let us create a  similar diagram for (8.13) to better understand the sense in which the Hopf theorem  relates to bifurcations. Because this is the bifurcation of a limit cycle from an equilibrium  point, we must plot not only the locus of the equilibrium point as 8 changes but also a  measure of the amplitude of the limit cycle. For the van der Pol equation (8.13) the steady  state is always at the origin and simply changes from asymptotically stable to unstable as  0 passes through zero. The amplitude of the limit cycle as a function of 0 must be obtained  from simulations using VanDerPol.m, and several conventions can be used to plot it in the  bifurcation diagram. The convention I shall adopt is to choose one of the variables, in this  case x, and plot both the maximum and minimum values that occur on the limit cycle.  Nonlinear oscillations  129  T  i  i  ' — i  <  r  Asymptotically  stable limit cycle  \  Supercritical (soft) Bifurcation  _i  I  i  I  i  i  .  i  Unstable  Limit Cycle  / v  Subcritical (hard) Bifurcation  I  0  1  Bifurcation Parameter p  o  Bifurcation Parameter  Fig. 8.9 Hopf bifurcations. A supercritical or soft bifurcation is depicted on the left, while a subcritical or  hard bifurcation is plotted on the right. These are also called pitchfork bifurcations because of their shape.  Limit cycles are indicated by a gray region connecting the maximum and minimum values of a variable x(l) on  the cycle. Solid lines indicate asymptotically stable states, and dashed lines indicate unstable states.  To emphasize that these are just two points on the same trajectory, the area between them  will be shaded light gray. The results for (8.13) are plotted on the left in Fig. 8.9. The other  convention for bifurcation diagrams is to plot asymptotically stable solutions with solid  lines and unstable solutions with dashed lines. As can be seen, the asymptotically stable  limit cycle emerges with infinitesimal amplitude as 0 passes through zero and the origin 