periodic behavior (quasiperiodic trajectories), while others can be aperiodic and chaotic.  In developing a definition of chaos, let us consider the various possibilities for a tra- jectory confined to a torus in a higher dimensional system. Assume that the torus contains  174  Spikes, decisions, and actions  no equilibrium points, so the trajectory can never come to rest. The fact that the trajectory  is confined to a torus means that it must remain bounded for all future time, and we shall  see that this is one crucial element in the definition of chaos. The simplest possibility is  that the trajectory will approach an asymptotically stable limit cycle, a scenario studied  extensively in the past three chapters.  As a second possibility, consider a four-dimensional linear system. Without bothering  to write down the equations, let us assume that the eigenvalues of the system are all pure  imaginary. Suppose, for example, that they are A = ± 2i and A = ± 5i. All four variables  describing any particular trajectory will now have the form:  A", = Asm(2t) + 5cos(2?) + Csin(5?) + Z)cos(5?)  (11.1)  Thus, all variables will be sums of two oscillations, with the parameters A-D being  determined by initial conditions. In this case, no matter what the values of A-D may be,  every solution is a closed trajectory with frequency 27r/10. This is an oscillation (but not a  limit cycle), and it simply represents a coiled spring spiraling around a torus in the four- dimensional state space of the system and connecting up with itself.  Suppose now that a parameter in the four-dimensional system that gave rise to solution  (11.1) is changed so that the eigenvalues now become A = ± 2i and A = ±\/23i. Now the  solutions will be of the form:  Xi = Asm(2t) +Bcos(2t) + Csm(v/23?) + Dcos(V23t)  (11.2)  where A-D are again determined by the initial conditions. This example has been chosen  so that one frequency is irrational while the other is not. Therefore, the solution cannot be  periodic, because there is no period T after which both oscillations in (11.2) return to  exactly the same values simultaneously. The trajectories of a dynamical system that has at  least two frequencies, at least one being irrational, are called quasiperiodic. In the four- dimensional space of the system with solutions (11.2), each trajectory will spiral around a  torus without ever rejoining or crossing itself. Nevertheless, (11.2) is not very different  from a true periodic solution such as (11.1), hence the term quasiperiodic. One further  characteristic that (11.1) and (11.2) have in common is that trajectories starting from very  similar initial conditions (similar values of A-D) will remain close together for all future  time. The same is true of nonlinear systems with limit cycle oscillations, where neigh- boring trajectories approach the limit cycle together.  In contrast to all examples above, some nonlinear dynamical systems exhibit complex,  aperiodic dynamics that are now called chaos. Chaos can be defined by distinguishing it  from the alternative dynamical behaviors in higher dimensional systems discussed above:  Definition: A deterministic nonlinear dynamical system in three or more dimensions  exhibits chaos if all of the following conditions are satisfied for some range of param- eters. (1) Trajectories are aperiodic (not quasiperiodic). (2) These aperiodic trajec- tories remain within a bounded volume of the state space but do not approach any  steady states. (3) There is sensitivity to initial conditions such that arbitrarily small dif- ferences in initial conditions between nearby trajectories grow exponentially in time.  Neural chaos  175  The three conditions in this definition concisely differentiate chaos from other dynamical  behaviors. Periodic and quasiperiodic behaviors are explicitly excluded. The sensitivity to  initial conditions means that any small difference in measurement of initial conditions of a  chaotic system will shortly lead to exponential uncertainty and inability to predict its  behavior in the future. The atmosphere of the earth is a chaotic system with the con- sequence that weather prediction more than a few days in advance is extremely proble- matic. Chaos was first fully studied by the meteorologist Edward Lorenz (1963, 1993),  although Poincare was aware earlier of nonlinear dynamical systems that have subse- quently been shown to be chaotic. Finally, the boundedness of all solutions means that  exponential growth of small differences in initial conditions is not simply a consequence of 