non-oscillatory trajectories that either spiral towards or else away from the oscillation  over time. Let us make this precise with a definition:  Definition: An oscillatory trajectory in the state space of a nonlinear system is a  limit cycle if all trajectories in a sufficiently small region enclosing the trajectory  are spirals. If these neighboring trajectories spiral towards the limit cycle as  ? —> oo, then the limit cycle is asymptotically stable. If, however, neighboring  trajectories spiral away from the limit cycle as ? —• oo, the limit cycle is unstable.  Figure 8.1 shows schematic illustrations of both asymptotically stable and unstable limit  cycles in the phase plane of a two-dimensional system. Notice that the definition of a limit  cycle only requires that trajectories which are sufficiently close be open spirals. The reason  for this restriction is that many nonlinear systems contain several limit cycles separated  fromone another.  Before exploring limit cycles in neuroscience, it will be necessary to develop some  analytical tools to predict their existence. Let us first restrict our consideration to two- dimensional systems, as the relevant theorems are both more numerous and more  intuitive in this case. A very useful theorem due to Poincare, the discoverer of limit  cycles, states that a limit cycle must surround one or more equilibrium points:  Theorem 9: If a limit cycle exists in an autonomous two-dimensional system, it  must necessarily surround at least one equilibrium point. If it encloses only one,  that one must be a node, spiral point, or center, but not a saddle point. If it  surrounds more than one equilibrium point, then the following equation must be  satisfied:  N- S= 1  where N is the number of (nodes ± spiral points + centers), and S is the number of  saddle points.  The requirement that the system be autonomous means that all coefficients must be  constant. This guarantees that no trajectory can cross itself. The reason is simple: the  differential equations describing the system define a unique direction at every point in  118  Spikes, decisions, and actions  Fig. 8.1  Closed curves depict an asymptotically stable limit cycle (left) and an unstable limit cycle (right).  Neighboring trajectories are plotted by arrows.  Fig. 8.2  Phase plane of a two-dimensional dynamical system with the three steady states indicated. Theorem  9 indicates that any possible limit cycle must surround one of the sets of steady states indicated by the three  closed curves.  state space. If a trajectory were to cross itself, there would have to be two different  directions specified by the equations at some point, but this is impossible unless the  coefficients of the equations change with time, which has been prohibited. An intuitive  grasp of Theorem 9 can therefore be gained from the observation that trajectories ori- ginating inside a limit cycle in the phase plane can never cross the limit cycle because it is a  closed oscillatory trajectory. Therefore, these trajectories must either originate or ter- minate somewhere, and that must be a steady state (or another limit cycle which itself  surrounds a steady state, etc.)  Figure 8.2 illustrates the possible locations for limit cycles in a two-dimensional system  with three steady states: a node, a spiral point, and a saddle point. In this example.  Theorem 9 precludes a limit cycle around any pair of the steady states. Note that Theorem  9 tells us nothing about the exact location or size or even the existence of the limit cycle but  only about the set of steady states it would have to enclose if it existed.  Theorem 9 is a necessary but by no means sufficient condition for the existence of limit  cycles in a nonlinear system. In Chapter 6, for example, we encountered several nonlinear  systems with multiple steady states, such as two nodes and a saddle point, and yet there  Nonlinear oscillations  119  were no limit cycles to be found in those cases. What we need is a theorem that specifies  conditions under which a system must have a limit cycle. Fortunately, such a theorem  exists for two-dimensional systems. Let us first state the Poincare-Bendixon Theorem and  then sketch a proof using diagrams.  Theorem 10 (Poincare-Bendixon): Suppose there is an annular region in an  autonomous (i.e. constant coefficient) two-dimensional system that satisfies two  conditions: (1) the annulus contains no equilibrium points; and (2) all trajectories  that cross the boundaries of that annulus enter it. Then the annulus must contain  at least one asymptotically stable limit cycle.  Theorem 10 is easily understood by examining Fig. 8.3. This figure shows an annular 