/ dF  dxi  dG  \cTx  Eq  1 'Eq  dF_  dx2  dG  dx2  Eq  Eq  (6.6)  where the partial derivatives in the matrix are evaluated at the equilibrium point and xj  and x2 are the values of the variables relative to the equilibrium values. This matrix of first  partial derivatives is called the Jacobian or Jacobian matrix. The Jacobian for any non- linear system of A equations will always be Ax N in size.  The higher order Taylor series terms in the expansion of F and G will be at least  quadratic in X| and x2, so the linear terms in the Jacobian will dominate when Xj and x2 are  sufficiently close to equilibrium. Therefore, you might expect that the linear stability  analysis of (6.6) would also apply to (6.1) near equilibrium. This is basically correct and is  captured in the following theorem, which applies to nonlinear systems of any order:  Theorem 8: Given the nonlinear system described by the equation:  dX  d?  F(X)  and an equilibrium point at XEq, which is a solution to:  i^Ea) = 0  calculate the Jacobian to produce an associated linear equation:  dx  where  A =  d?  (m  dx\  dF2  5x7  Ax  dFi  dx-)  dF2  dx2  V  dFN  dxN J  where all partial derivatives are evaluated at XEq. Then sufficiently near XEq: (a) if all  eigenvalues of the linear system have negative real parts, the nonlinear system is  asymptotically stable; and (b) if the linear system has at least one eigenvalue with a  positive real part, the nonlinear system is unstable. In addition, the type of equili- brium point for the nonlinear system, i.e. spiral point, node, or saddle point, will be  the same as that for the associated linear equation.  76  Spikes, decisions, and actions  Two special cases are explicitly excluded by Theorem 8. First, if A has a pair of pure  imaginary roots and therefore is a stable center (but not asymptotically stable), the the- orem does not apply. Second, if any root of A is zero, the theorem again fails to apply. The  higher order terms in the Taylor expansion of Fbecome critical when the associated linear  system has any roots with zero real part. It is also important to note that Theorem 8 does  not specify just how close to equilibrium one must be for the theorem to apply.  Determining this requires the use of Lyapunov functions, which will be introduced in  Chapter 14.  Let us apply Theorem 8 to the divisive gain control in (6.3). For L = 10, the steady state  occurs at B = 2; A = 4. Let time constants be 10 ms. Calculation of the Jacobian now  gives:  A =  (  \  1  "To  l  5  (i + ^r  \  i  io  /  \  I  10  (6.7)  where the right-hand equality results from evaluation of the Jacobian at the steady state.  Using LinearOrder2.m, the eigenvalues are A = —0.1 ± 0.089i. Thus, the equilibrium is  an asymptotically stable spiral point for both the associated linear system and for the  nonlinear system in (6.3). Given this analysis of (6.3), it is now appropriate to simulate the  solution using Runge-Kutta methods. Results of simulations using the MatLab script  DivFB.m are plotted in Fig. 6.2. As can be seen, the solution with initial conditions A = 0,  B = 0 asymptotically approaches the unique steady state in the first quadrant with a  damped oscillation, as was predicted by analysis of (6.7). The simulation suggests that  trajectories starting far from the steady state will approach it asymptotically, although  this cannot be determined using Theorem 8. Figure 6.2 also shows that the transient  overshoot of the response is relatively larger when the light intensity L= 100 than it is  when L= 10. This is a manifestation of the nonlinear dynamics.  1 4  1 2  1 0  CO  0) «  c  o  CD  rr  6  _  -1  1  I  i  1  I  1  f ^  J  X  1  \  1  N  1  s. 