dicting behaviors of complex systems. This became apparent as early as 1952, when  Hodgkin and Huxley developed the highly nonlinear differential equations that predict  the generation of action potentials in neurons (Hodgkin and Huxley, 1952). Since that  time dynamical systems theory has been effectively employed in understanding and  predicting the responses of vertebrate photoreceptors to light (Schnapf et ai, 1990), the  behavior of neural networks that control swimming (Ekeberg, 1993), the neural dynamics  2  Spikes, decisions, and actions  underlying light adaptation in the retina (Wilson, 1997), and many other neural  phenomena.  In addition to providing a powerful analytic tool, nonlinear dynamics will also intro- duce the neuroscientist to important new concepts and phenomena that simply cannot  occur in linear systems. One of these is the limit cycle oscillation (Chapters 8 and 9), which  may fairly be said to be the foundation of all biological and neural oscillatory behavior.  Indeed, an understanding of limit cycles is necessary to both the scientist who would  understand the ionic basis of action potentials and to the neuroscientist studying motor  control at the network level. Systems with multiple equilibrium points (Chapter 6), which  enable the system to categorize its inputs, make decisions, and perform short-term  memory functions, are another concept unique to nonlinear dynamics. Finally, there is  the notion of chaos, which is sufficiently fascinating to have captivated the popular press.  Chaotic systems (Chapter 11) are ones which are perfectly predictable in principle but yet  seem to behave in a highly unpredictable fashion, almost as though they possessed a  modicum of free will! Chaos, too, is a dynamical phenomenon unique to nonlinear sys- tems. Acquaintance with these and other nonlinear concepts will enrich the arma- mentarium of the contemporary neuroscientist whether or not her/his main focus  is mathematical. In addition, nonlinear dynamical concepts are highly relevant to  neuroscience-oriented discussions of philosophy of mind (e.g. Churchland, 1989), as  will be emphasized by occasional asides in the text.  It has sometimes been claimed that nonlinear dynamical systems are just too complex  to be adequately understood using available mathematical techniques. For example.  Green (1976, p. 33) stated: '[Nonlinear] systems are sometimes almost inscrutable.' While  this comment may have been justified earlier in the century, it is simply no longer true with  respect to the types of nonlinearities inherent in the nervous system. A major goal of this  book is to provide neuroscientists with the background necessary to appreciate the  sophistication and processing power of neural nonlinearities. By restricting treatment  to just those types of nonlinearities that are most relevant to neuroscience, it is possible to  give a treatment of nonlinear dynamics that is succinct and yet sufficiently general to  enable one to begin applying these powerful techniques in one's own research. Indeed, the  title of this book. Spikes, decisions, and actions, reflects the importance of nonlinear  dynamics at all levels from spike generation to the level of networks that make decisions  and control actions.  Sometimes experimentalists who are resistant to theory claim that there is little to learn  from models, because they believe we obtain no results other than those we consciously  design into our models. While this may be more or less true for linear models due to their  simplicity, it is demonstrably false in the case of nonlinear models. The Hodgkin-Huxley  (1952) equations provide a classic example. More than 25 years elapsed before Rinzel  (1978) and Best (1979) predicted from a mathematical analysis of these highly nonlinear  equations that they should exhibit hysteresis. Even more counter-intuitive was the pre- diction that a brief depolarizing current pulse should permanently extinguish an ongoing  spike train if delivered at the proper phase. Both predictions were experimentally verified  by Guttman, Lewis, and Rinzel (1980) the next year. Furthermore, the Hodgkin-Huxley  (1952) equations were published years before chaos was characterized by mathemat- icians. Yet in 1987 it was predicted and experimentally verified that the squid axon should  Introduction  3  exhibit chaos (Degn et ai, 1987). Thus, the Hodgkin-Huxley (1952) equations correctly  predicted several novel phenomena that were clearly not conceived of by Hodgkin or  Huxley in designing their equations.  One might argue that the ready availability of desktop microcomputers has made  the study of nonlinear dynamics irrelevant: one need only approximate solutions of  equations to study their behavior. This viewpoint rests on several major misconceptions,  however. First, one is unlikely to have any idea what form the equations appropriate to a 