accurate than the 15° interval between preferred directions might lead one to suspect. A  sparse population code is a neural code in which activity of a small number of neurons  represents a response much more accurately than any single neuron would be capable of  by itself. In essence, a population code permits interpolation of intermediate responses  between the optimal values for individual units. To see that the network in (7.5) will  accurately encode intermediate values of direction, rerun the program with a variety of  vector lengths and angles within a ±45° range. For example, input vectors of length 20 at  —40° and length 8 at +30" yield a predicted direction of -22.4 as compared to a true  vector sum direction of -21.7°. This error of 0.7° is as large as the network will produce,  so the use of a three-unit sparse population code results in an improvement in accuracy by  more than a factor of 10 ( ±7.5° versus ±0.7'"'). (Conversion of the three neural responses  to a single number is accomplished by parabolic interpolation, see Wilson et al. (1992) for  details.)  Exclusion of A) and N2 from recurrent inhibition results in responses composed of a  three-neuron sparse population code in the equilibrium state. As shown in Fig. 7.5,  neurons with preferred directions differing by ±135° or more also do not compete.  Consequences of this absence of inhibition between nearly opposite directions will be  apparent if you rerun VectorWTA.m with two vectors of length 20 and directions of  ±75°. The result, depicted on the right of Fig. 7.6, is a pair of three-neuron responses in  nearly opposite directions. The network in (7.5) thus switches from signaling a single  direction to signaling two directions when the input vectors are sufficiently different. In  the example of motion perception discussed in conjunction with Fig. 7.4, this corresponds  Computation by excitatory and inhibitory networks  97  to a switch from rigid to transparent motion as has been experimentally observed (Kim  and Wilson, 1993). Such a switch in response is termed a categorical decision, because a  continuous range of stimulus variation (in this case defined by the angle between local  motion directions) is categorized into discrete responses: rigid or transparent. Further- more, the response to two equal length vectors at ±75° is predicted to be a pair of motion  vectors at ±82°. Such repulsion between motion directions when transparency is per- ceived has been observed in several experimental studies using a variety of stimuli (Kim  and Wilson, 1996; Marshak and Sekuler, 1979; Mather and Moulden, 1980). Direction  repulsion is a direct consequence of the recurrent inhibition illustrated in Fig. 7.5.  Although the units optimally responsive to directions of ±75° are not mutually inhibi- tory, their neighbors signaling ±60° are, so the population codes are biased away from  one another by the neural dynamics.  How can a WTA network produce vector summation? The key is a mathematical proof  that the vector sum direction fiv is given by the value of fi for which the cosine-weighted  sum in (7.4) is a maximum (Wilson et al., 1992):  fiv = max(Fn)  (7.6)  Although true for any number of vectors, let us prove here that the sum of two vectors  points in the direction is given by (7.6). Let the two vectors have lengths L\ and L2 and  point in directions 9\ and 82 . Thus, the x and v coordinates of the first vector will be  L\ cos(#i) and L\ sin(t9j) respectively with similar terms for the second vector. Vector  summation is accomplished by adding the x and y coordinates according to the formula:  L,cos(0,)\  f L2cos(92)\  ( L[cos(9l) +  L2cos(92)\  Li sin({9,) )  \ L2 sin(02) J ~ \ L\ sin(0,) ± L2 sm(92) )  ( ' '  The direction in which ('points, fiv, the vector sum direction, is just arctan( y/x) or:  / /F|Sin((Jl)±L2sin(c?2)^  fiv = arctan  —  ——  (7.8)  \L|Cos(0i) + L2cos(92)J  Now consider the cosine-weighted sum in (7.4):  En = L\ cos(fi -6i) + L2 cos(fi - 92) 