5  10  Time (ms)  15  20  Fig. 9.12 Subharmonic resonance exhibited by (9.7) in response to sinusoidal stimulation at 200, 400, and  700 Hz.  will result. These conditions generate one spike locked to the rising phase of each stimulus  cycle, hardly a surprising result. When the frequency is increased to u = 400 Hz, however,  the more unusual result in the middle panel is obtained. Now the neuron only generates an  action potential during each second cycle of the stimulus oscillation. This is the phe- nomenon of subharmonic resonance, also called frequency division. Strikingly, the spike  rate is the same for 200 Hz and 400 Hz stimuli! Finally, the bottom panel shows that at  700 Hz a spike is only generated during each third stimulus cycle, a further example of  subharmonic resonance. Experimentation with other stimulus values using HHnoise.m  will yield interesting and sometimes very irregular results, some of which are chaotic (see  Chapter 11).  Why does subharmonic resonance occur in neurons? The physiological answer is that  when stimuli oscillate at sufficiently high rates, one or more cycles will occur during the  absolute refractory period following the previous spike when no additional spikes can be  generated. A mathematical interpretation of this may be gained by considering a simpler  problem: the effect of a brief current pulse applied at various times during a spike train.  The script PhaseShift.m applies a constant depolarizing current / = 0.15 to eqn (9.7) and  allows one to specify both the amplitude and initiation time of a 0.1 ms pulse. If no pulse is  applied (pulse amplitude of zero), the equations produce a spike train with a period of  5.1 ms, as shown by the solid line in Fig. 9.13. If a pulse with amplitude = 1.0 is applied at  152  Spikes, decisions, and actions  V(t)  40  20  0  -20  -40  -60  -80 I MMM  1  i  •  i  i  i  i  i  i  i  i  i  i  1  >  i  ^ /  J(S\  y'fs^X  y'fy'  10  Time (ms)  15  20  Fig. 9.13 Phase shift produced by a brief depolarizing pulse (rectangle) delivered at 9.0ms to (9.7). The pulse  causes a phase advance (dashed curve) in the ongoing spike train (solid curve).  Fig. 9.14  Phase plane of (9.7) with a depolarizing pulse that produces the distortion of the limit cycle  indicated. If the same pulse is delivered at the phase shown by the arrow, the trajectory is shifted across the  bottom lobe of the dVjdt isocline, and an early spike is triggered.  ? = 9.0 ms, however, a significant phase shift occurs: the next spike occurs much earlier  than in the absence of the pulse (dashed line in Fig. 9.13). An earlier pulse with same  amplitude triggered at 8.0 ms produces almost no phase shift. Experimentation with  PhaseShift.m will reveal that pulses delivered within about 1.0 ms after completion of a  spike have almost no effect.  Further understanding of these phase shifts can be gained by examination of the state  space depicted in Fig. 9.14. The labeled pulse shows the deformation of the limit cycle  trajectory produced by a 0.1 ms pulse delivered at a phase that produces almost no phase  shift. The effect of the pulse is to shift the trajectory almost parallel to the Faxis by a short  distance. As this causes the trajectory to cross the dV/dt = 0 isocline to a region where  Action potentials and limit cycles  153  dV/dt < 0, the trajectory rapidly decays back to the original limit cycle following the  pulse. If the same pulse were delivered at the slightly later phase indicated by the hori- zontal arrow, however, it would push the trajectory entirely across the bottom lobe of the  dV/dt = 0 isocline to a region where dV/dt > 0, and the next spike would be triggered  early. Thus, spikes are triggered only at those phases where the pulse causes the trajectory  to jump across the bottom lobe of the d V/dt isocline. The refractory period is just the  phase range where stimuli are not sufficiently strong to produce a large enough jump in  the trajectory. These observations also provide an explanation for subharmonic reson-