asymptotically stable. Assuming a < ir/2, which is appropriate given the brief duration of  synaptic transmission relative to a single cycle of running, the balance between the left- right coupling strength b and the diagonal coupling strength c determines which gait will  be stable. These coefficients are presumably regulated by excitatory and inhibitory  command signals from higher brain centers.  Before leaving the quadruped example, it is worth mentioning that inhibitory coupling  can lead to phase locking as effectively as excitatory coupling can. If b = 0 in (13.14),  inhibitory coupling between diagonal limbs (c < 0) leads to asymptotic stability of the  solution 0 = 0. The extent to which different quadruped gaits are determined by inhibi- tory as opposed to excitatory coupling is at present unknown.  13.5 Tritonia swimming  Recent research indicates that some rather general principles underlie the control of  swimming in both vertebrates and invertebrates (Getting, 1989a,b; Pearson, 1993; Stein  etai, 1997). Asa basis for comparison with the vertebrate lamprey, let us briefly examine  the neural network underlying swimming in the marine mollusk Tritonia. The discussion  that follows is based on both the experimental and neural modeling work of Getting and  colleagues (Getting and Dekin, 1985; Getting, 1988, 1989a,b. 1997).  218  Spikes, decisions, and actions  (2 neurons)  DSI Ji*J^JBjHUilL^  vs, j - i j j m _ _  5 sec  Fig. 13.6 Tritonia swimming network. The three cell types with excitatory (arrows) and inhibitory (solid  circles) interconnections arc illustrated in A. B shows five cycles of rhythmic firing behavior triggered by a  brief stimulus (bar at bottom left) (reproduced with permission. Getting and Dekin. 1985).  The Tritonia swimming network is illustrated in Fig. 13.6A, while the neural activity of  the three neuron types is depicted in Fig. 13.6B (data from Getting and Dekin, 1985).  Following brief activation of the dorsal swim interneurons (DSIs), the network produces  4-7 cycles of rhythmic activity. As is evident from Fig. 13.6B, activation of the DSIs leads  to activation of the C2 neurons and finally to activation of the ventral swim interneurons  (VSIs); then the cycle repeats itself. Swimming activity is produced as a result of DSI cells  exciting motor neurons that produce dorsal flexions of the mollusk's tail, while VSI cells  excite other motor neurons causing ventral flexion. Thus, the mollusk swims away.  The anatomy of the network, depicted in Fig. 13.6A, illustrates the interconnections  among all three classes of neurons. Fhe DSI cells (three in the network) are mutually  excitatory and also excite the lone C2 neuron while inhibiting the two VSIs. The VSI are  also mutually excitatory. Simply looking at the anatomical diagram, it might seem dif- ficult to suppose that this network could generate a sustained oscillation. As with the  lamprey, the key to understanding lies in the interplay between the anatomical connec- tions and the intrinsic ionic currents within the different cell types. Both the DSI and C2  exhibit prominent /AHP currents that produce prominent spike frequency adaptation,  while the VSI cells have a prominent /A current. Thus, the DSIs driving the network adapt  sufficiently so that activity from the VSI cells (driven by the DSI via the C2 neuron) will  quench their activity. The VSIs, despite their mutual excitation, inhibit their C2 activation  source, and their I\ current causes their firing to reduce to such a low level that the DSIs  can shut them off.  A simulation of the Tritonia swimming network requires a number of decisions to be  made, and the simulation developed here is similar in spirit to those of Getting (1989a,b)  Swimming and traveling waves  219  and Frost et al. (1997). First, let us choose to simulate the individual neurons at the level of  ion currents and individual spikes. Second, the network can be simplified by treating the  individual neurons of the DSI and VSI types as identical and using symmetry subsampling  as in the lamprey model. In addition, the simulation must incorporate /AHP currents in the  DSI and C2 neurons and an /A current in the VSI cells. These modeling decisions are 