fashion by simulating the entire lamprey spinal chord plus the biomechanics of muscle  contraction in alternately curving the animal's body first left and then right. His simu- lations incorporated the mass of the animal, sensory feedback to the spinal networks from  stretch receptors, and drag forces of water on the body. Some of the biomechanical  principles of water drag forces had been developed by Gray (1968).  Although the biomechanical details go beyond the scope of this book, it is possible to  get the flavor of lamprey swimming from a few simple considerations. Let us start with the  neural activity generated by the segmental oscillator as shown in Fig. 13.2B. As activity  in Ei and £R causes alternate activation of the left and right motor neurons M, the  appropriate waveform for control of the muscles is EE — £R. Fhis is plotted by the solid  line in Fig. 13.4. As one cycle of this oscillation forms a traveling wave with one wave- length per body length, the abscissa in Fig. 13.4 is body length in cm, the lamprey aver- aging 30 cm in length (Ekeberg, 1993). Fo simplify computation of traveling waves, the  neural activity has been approximated by the sum of two sine waves shown by the dashed  line in the figure. From the discussion of muscle models in Chapter 3, let us assume that  the neural activity sets the threshold length and therefore the force generated by the  muscles. Given Newton's second law of motion, F = M A, the change in muscle length will  be inversely proportional to mass per body segment. As discussed by Ekeberg (1993),  lamprey body mass is approximately proportional to the width of the body, which is  constant for about 10cm from the head and then tapers linearly to the tail. Accordingly,  the same level of neural activity will produce a greater bend in the angle between body  segments near the tail than near the head. Finally, the drag forces of water result in the  lamprey's forward progress being less than the distance of wave travel along its body per  o  <  =3  Swimming and traveling waves  1 00  50  5 0 - 1 OoLt  i  i  1  1  r  Segmental Oscillator  215  0  5  10  15  20  25  30  Position along Body (cm)  Fig. 13.4 Neural activity of the lamprey segmental oscillator (£ L-£ R) in (13.1) compared with an approxi- mation based on the sum of two sines.  unit time. The MatLab script SwimmingLamprey.m approximates these factors to  produce a computer animation of a swimming lamprey as seen from above, and several  frames of the animation are depicted in Fig. 13.1B. Although the biomechanics of turning  to the left or right have not been simulated, the MatLab script LampreyTurn.m with a  small difference in stimulus levels to the left and right sides (e.g. 7 and 5) will produce more  prolonged neural activity on one side of the lamprey than on the other, which is the neural  basis of turning. This completes the analysis of swimming behavior in lampreys, from  serotonin modulation of/AHP currents to the complete animal! For further details of the  neural modeling and biomechanics of swimming, see Gray (1968) and Ekeberg (1993).  13.4 Quadruped locomotion  Terrestrial quadruped locomotion is a much more complex problem than lamprey  swimming and is accordingly much less well understood. One reason for this is that  quadrupeds have several different gaits that are used for different speeds of locomotion,  walking and galloping being the two extremes. A second reason is that quadruped  locomotion must be stable with respect to the force of gravity, or the animal will fall.  Nevertheless, it is possible to gain some insight into phase locking for stable quadruped  locomotion by developing a phase oscillator network for control of four limbs.  During locomotion, each limb of a quadruped is controlled by an oscillator in the spinal  cord that generates alternate flexion and extension of the limb. During flexion the limb is  pulled up and swung forward, while during extension the limb makes contact with the  ground and supports the body weight. Furthermore, sensory feedback is not necessary to  generate the flexion-extension cycle (Pearson, 1993; Shik et ai, 1966). Walking and  trotting obviously require coordination among the four oscillators controlling the four  216  Spikes, decisions, and actions 