5 > d ? + 9 * = 0  This was the first mathematical model proposed for cardiac rhythms, and it has also been  used to simulate brain waves. Solve this equation using RungeKutta4.m (convert to  normal form first) with the initial conditions x(0) = 1 and dx/d? = Oat? = 0. Carry out the  simulation up to time ? = 10. First choose your time step/; = 0.05. Next, make an estimate  of the error of your approximation. Using the formulas in the chapter, reduce h until your  error estimate is less than 0.001. Be sure to indicate the value of/; used, how you arrived at  it, and your final error estimate. Plot both x(?) and the phase plane (x, dx/d?) for your final  simulation.  Nonlinear neurodynamics and  bifurcations  We have completed our survey of linear dynamical systems and have developed simu- lation methods suitable for application to either linear or nonlinear systems. This chapter  begins our exploration of nonlinear dynamics in neural systems. The chapter will develop  the basic approach, which relates the local properties of nonlinear systems to those of  associated linear systems. Three different ways in which two neurons can interact will be  discussed next: (1) negative feedback in a divisive gain control, (2) mutual excitation in  short-term memory, and (3) mutual inhibition in neural decision making. It will also be  shown that neural adaptation can lead to memory loss, a topic that will introduce  bifurcation theory.  Neurons will be described by the temporal variation of their spike rates in this chapter  rather than at the level of individual spikes. There are several reasons for this. First, many  principles of neurodynamics can be effectively studied at the spike rate level of descrip- tion, and the mathematics is considerably simplified. Second, spike trains are examples of  nonlinear oscillations mathematically, and so this level of description must await  development of that topic in Chapter 8. Finally, experimental data reported as histograms  and many theoretical problems in neuroscience are in fact described as spike rates.  6.1 Steady states and isoclines  Let us begin with a general mathematical description of a two interacting neurons:  dx,  -T7 = F(X,,.Y2)  H  (6.1)  dx-i  -77 =  G(xux2)  d?  Fand G can be any of a wide range of nonlinear functions of x; and x2, but they must have  certain properties to insure that (6.1) will have unique solutions. It will be sufficient to  require that in the region of physiological interest Fand G are both finite and continuous.  We can even tolerate a finite number of finite discontinuities in For G or their derivatives  (as was the case in our piecewise linear approximation to an EPSP in Chapter 2). These  requirements do not limit us to any significant extent, as all physiologically plausible  systems satisfy these constraints.  The dynamical behavior of (6.1) will generally be quite complex and will require  Runge Kutta simulation in order to follow the temporal evolution in detail. However, we  Nonlinear neurodynamics and bifurcations  73  can learn an enormous amount about the solutions by studying the nature of the equili- brium points or steady states of the system. As dxi/d? = Oanddx2/d? = Oat a steady state,  the steady states of (6.1) must satisfy the equations:  F(*„x2)=0  G(x,,x 2)=0  '  '  If this were a linear system, these would be simultaneous linear equations. For a nonlinear  system, however, each of the equations in (6.2) will describe some curve in the (xi, x2) state  space of the system, and the intersections of these curves will determine the equilibrium  points. Equations (6.2) describe the isoclines of the system, a term which literally means  'equal slope'. Thus, F = 0 describes the locus of points in state space where dxi /dt = 0, so  all trajectories must cross this isocline parallel to the x2 axis. Similarly, on the isocline  where G = 0,dx2/d? = 0, and trajectories will parallel the X| axis. Fand G are simulta- neously zero where the isoclines intersect, and this defines an equilibrium point. It should  be noted here that some authors use the term nullcline instead of isocline to emphasize that  the slope is null or zero along these particular isoclines. However, isoclines are almost 