partmental models, so the most complex descriptive level is the multi-compartment  neuron, where multi typically ranges from 10 to several hundred.  In choosing among these levels of neural description one is faced with a number of  trade-offs. It is obviously possible to simulate 100 times as many neurons if the description  of each involves just one differential equation rather than 100. In the opposite direction,  increasing realism is certainly achieved in moving from a spike rate description to a two or  more compartment model. This consideration might seem to push one towards the  maximum number of compartments compatible with computer memory. However,  neurons simulated with very large numbers of compartments suffer in two important  respects. First, there are almost always far more parameters in these models than can be  reliably estimated from the data available. Second, very high dimensional nonlinear  systems become impossible to analyze mathematically, so the responses of huge com- partmental models frequently fail to provide any insight into underlying dynamical  causes. Thus, simulations of very large compartmental models are probably best regarded  as empirical experiments on 'virtual neurons'. As with experiments on any real neuron,  one is also confronted here with the issue of whether the results obtained are generic as  opposed to idiosyncratic.  So, what is the best strategy for choosing a level of neural description? In part  the answer is dictated by the problem: those wishing to simulate visual cortex or the  282  Spikes, decisions, and actions  hippocampus will of necessity employ large numbers of neurons with the simplest possible  description of each (probably spike rates), while those interested in the detailed ionic  contributions to intracellular recordings will choose multi-compartment models. My bias  is to choose the simplest possible description consistent with the data one wishes to explain.  The striking success of the two-compartment model (Pinsky and Rinzel, 1994; Booth and  Rinzel, 1995; Booth et al., 1997) in explaining not only plateau potentials but also the range  of spiking patterns observed in neocortical neurons (Mainen and Sejnowski, 1996) sug- gests that it may seldom be necessary to move beyond this level of neural description.  In keeping with the strategy of simplifying neural models as much as possible, one final  point deserves mention. When a group of similar neurons are interconnected, it is fre- quently possible to represent their activity by that of a single neuron. We have seen  examples of this subsampling technique in the Wilson-Cowan equations (1972, 1973) and  in the lamprey simulations of Wallen et al. (1992). Thus, quite large neural network  problems may frequently be reduced to manageable proportions. It is worth remembering  that the goal of modeling complex neural systems is insight into the underlying compu- tational dynamics, and simplification is frequently crucial to insight.  16.3 Nonlinear dynamics in other fields  Spikes, decisions, and actions has focused exclusively on the nonlinear dynamical prin- ciples required to understand neural function. Despite this focus, virtually all of these  mathematical principles find application in a wide range of other scientific fields. Fore- most among these is certainly physics, the science with the longest history of mathemat- ical sophistication. Two excellent books revealing the application of nonlinear dynamics  to physics are From Order to Chaos by Kadanoff (1993) and Order within Chaos by Berge  et ai (1984).  Within biology, nonlinear dynamics has probably had its largest impact in neuro- science, due largely to the brilliant work culminating in the Hodgkm-Huxley (1952)  equations. As a result, several other approaches to dynamics in neuroscience have also  been developed. Books by Kelso (1995) and Haken (1996) both stress the importance of  nonlinear dynamics in neuroscience, but both are slanted more toward approaches  introduced in statistical physics, so they provide complementary treatments to Spikes,  decisions, and actions.  In addition to neuroscience, dynamical approaches are now common in many areas of  biology including ecology, cardiac rhythms, and developmental pattern formation.  Excellent surveys of dynamical approaches in these areas are provided in books by  Edelstein-Keshet (1988), Glass and Mackey (1988), and Murray (1989). To cite one  example, Murray (1989) provides an elegant treatment of the ways in which nonlinear  diffusion-reaction equations can generate the patterning of spots on leopards or the  designs of butterfly wings. These turn out to be examples of self-organizing systems with  similar dynamical principles to those underlying visual hallucinations in excitatory- inhibitory networks (Ermentrout and Cowan, 1979).  Dynamical modeling has even been fruitfully employed in sociology. Kadanoff (1993) 