would become identical to (9.10) from which they were derived. In this case the system  must remain at rest in the absence of external current, so (10.3) could no longer fire  bursts.  We can take these considerations still further by employing a mathematical analog of a  technique used by electrophysiologists. Mathieu and Roberge (1971) revealed the role of  slow Ca2+ currents in mediating bursting in aplysia neurons by applying tetrodotoxin  (TTX), a nerve poison, to the neuron from which they were recording. TTX is extracted  from glands of the Japanese puffer fish, regarded as a sushi delicacy in Japan, but it is a  deadly neurotoxin that occasionally kills gourmets when the sushi chef fails to remove the  glands properly. TTX operates by blocking the voltage-sensitive Na+ channels that are  responsible for the rising phase of the action potential. Thus, someone who ingests TTX  will shortly have all neurons in his brain stop firing! The effects of TTX on an aplysia  neuron are illustrated in Fig. 10.4B. Following application at the time indicated, suc- cessive bursts are reduced to fewer and fewer action potentials until all are abolished. As  shown in the final record in Fig. 10.4B, however, the neuron continued to generate a slow  oscillation in membrane potential even when all spikes had vanished. This biophysical  approach demonstrates that bursts of action potentials in aplysia are riding on crests of an  endogenous oscillation of membrane potential driven by slow depolarizing and hyper- polarizing currents.  Let us alter eqn (10.3) to reproduce the effects of TTX. All we need do is replace the V  dependence of the Na ¥ conductance, which multiplies the potential term (F - 0.48) in the  dV/dl equation, by its constant value at rest. As the equilibrium of (10.3) occurs at  V = —0.727, let us evaluate the Na+ conductance at this point where its value is found to  be 1.0836. This represents a passive leakage conductance at rest that was explicit  in eqns (9.1) to (9.3) but was absorbed in subsequent analysis. This changes the  Neural adaptation and bursting  165  first equation in (10.3) to:  dF  — = -1.0836(F- 0.48) -26R(V+  0.95)  - 1.93A-(1 - 0 . 5 C ) ( F - 1.4) -3.25C(V+  0.95)  (10.4)  In this equation the active aspect of the Na+ conductance has been blocked with a  mathematical application of TTX, thus leaving only the passive properties of the mem- brane with respect to Na+. The effects of incorporating (10.4) into (10.3) may be observed  by running the script PlantBursterTTX.m. This produces the voltage oscillations in Fig.  10.5C, which may be compared with the aplysia TTX data in Fig. 10.4B. Clearly, our  mathematical application of TTX has abolished all spiking activity. In doing so, however,  it has revealed an intrinsic limit cycle driven by the X and C variables. The program shows  this by plotting the A-C projection of the four-dimensional phase space of the system. One  can now complement this simulation with a mathematical analysis of the TTX poisoned  system in (10.4). If the coefficient 7.33 in the dX/dt equation in (10.3) is treated as a  variable parameter, it cane shown by linearized analysis that the system undergoes a Hopf  bifurcation to a limit cycle as this coefficient increases from zero. This demonstrates that  the slow depolarizing Ca2+ current mediated by A is responsible both for the intrinsic  membrane oscillations in the TTX simulation and for the bursting exhibited by (10.3).  Before leaving the Plant (1981) model for bursting in aplysia, let us consider one final  aspect of the spike bursts. A close examination of Fig. 10.4A reveals that each burst begins  and ends with interspike intervals that are longer than those in the middle of the burst.  Thus, the instantaneous spike frequency in these bursts begins low, climbs to a peak, and  then decays before the burst is finally extinguished by hyperpolarization. This is known as  parabolic bursting because the spike rate approximates a parabola during each burst. 