* » • . . . . %..  -05  0  Retum(T)  0 5  -100  30  40  Time(ms)  Fig. 11.5 Return map (above) and spike train (below) produced by (11.6) in response to 264.6Hz sinusoidal  modulation with amplitude A =0.007. This spike train is chaotic.  it is natural to choose the known interval that is the sinusoidal stimulus period and  record the values of F(?) at those time instants. If the period is p. F(?) is plotted versus  F(? + p), and the resulting map provides the same information as a first return map. For  example, under conditions where each stimulus cycle triggers a phase-locked spike, the  system has a simple limit cycle, and the F(?) versus F(? + p) map will be a single point. For  the more complex limit cycle resulting from the more complex limit cycle in Fig. 11.3, the  plot will have two points, etc. This variant for producing a first return map is implemented  in ForcedChaosTester.m. When running this program the length of the sinusoidal period  must be specified in terms of the number of samples produced by the simulation, and an  offset which sets the phase for sample selection must also be chosen. In this case the period  is 189, i.e. 1000ms/(264.6 x 0.02 ms), where 0.02 ms is the time increment in the simula- tion, and a convenient phase is 1/4 of this (47), so samples are obtained at the peak phase  of the forcing function. If this program is used to analyze the spike train generated when  A = 0.007, you will obtain the first return map shown at the top of Fig. 11.5. (Note that  several thousand returns are needed to produce a detailed map.) This return map clearly  has the type of structure that is a signature of chaos. Furthermore, the Fourier power  spectrum produced by the program is also consistent with the existence of chaos. Finally,  running LyapunovHHW.m, which incorporates (11.6), shows that the Lyapunov expo- nent A = + 0.16, so neighboring trajectories diverge exponentially on average. As the time  Neural chaos  183  30  60  Time (ms)  90  Fig. 11.6 Chaotic spike train produced by a squid axon in response to sinusoidal modulation at 264 Hz  (Everson, 1987). Variability in spike timing and amplitude are similar to those produced by eqn (11.6) in the  previous figure.  scale is milliseconds, this value of A will cause divergence by a factor of about e9 in 100 ms!  Thus, all three criteria for chaos are satisfied, and it can be concluded that (11.6) produces  chaotic spike trains over certain ranges of sinusoidal forcing.  Although (11.6) represents a simplification of the Hodgkin-Huxley equations, it has  been shown by similar simulations that the original equations do in fact exhibit chaotic  dynamics when they are forced sinusoidally. Furthermore, Everson (1987) and others (see  Degn et ai, 1987) have demonstrated chaotic spike trains in periodically stimulated squid  axons. Chaotic data resulting from 264 Hz sinusoidal stimulation of a squid axon are  plotted in Fig. 11.6 (Everson, 1987). There is reasonable qualitative agreement between  these experimental data and the spike train produced by (11.6) and shown in Fig. 11.5.  11.4 Implications of neural chaos  In addition to the example above, many neural systems have been shown to exhibit  chaotic dynamics under appropriate circumstances. What are the potential implications  of this fact? The sensitivity to initial conditions in chaos implies lack of long-term pre- dictability when there is any uncertainty about the initial conditions (and there is always  some measurement error in the laboratory!). If a neural preparation is in a chaotic regime,  the experimenter will never be able to predict details of the spike trains beyond a rather  brief interval determined by the Lyapunov exponent. This observation holds true  regardless of the level of detail or number of ion channels that the scientist attempts to  control in the preparation. There are only two possible alternatives: content oneself with  detailed prediction only for a very brief period, or predict only the mean spike rates, etc.,  over a longer period. The same situation is faced by the meteorologist in attempting to  predict the weather. Due to chaos in the atmosphere, detailed prediction of daily tem-