studied nonlinear interactions of factors mediating the growth and decay of urban  Nonlinear dynamics and brain function  283  centers. There is currently also evidence that political and economic decision making can  exhibit chaotic dynamics (Richards, 1990). It is also likely that dynamical models of  species interactions in ecology will be relevant to understanding sociological interactions.  Finally, I think it is now becoming clear that nonlinear dynamical concepts are central  to issues in both psychology and philosophy. As we have seen, perceptual categorization  and decision making receive a natural explanation in terms of bifurcations in competitive  networks. Furthermore, the existence of neural chaos is clearly relevant to discussions of  free will and determinism, as chaotic systems are deterministic without being predictable.  Recent evidence for chaos in perception (Richards et ai, 1994) is certainly germane to this  issue. Several thoughtful evaluations of the significance of neural network models for  philosophy are available in books by Churchland (1989), Bechtel and Abrahamsen  (1991), and Clark (1989). This should emphasize that nonlinear concepts provide an  indispensable qualitative framework for exploring a vast range of phenomena.  16.4 Mathematics in mind  Exploration of the dynamical principles underlying brain function leads finally to the  ultimate question in nonlinear dynamics: how is it possible for the brain to create and  understand mathematics? Otherwise stated, what sort of nonlinear neurodynamical  system or 'mind' is required to instantiate mathematics? This may seem an impossibly  complex question, and neuroscientists are certainly only beginning to nibble at its edges.  Nevertheless, some promising directions for conceptualizing the broad outlines of an  answer are beginning to emerge.  In his eminently readable book, The Number Sense: How the Mind Creates Math- ematics, Dehaene (1997) provides a concise summary of research on the brain and  mathematics. One fundamental observation is that all mammals show an ability to dis- criminate relative magnitudes that is similar to the average human who has not been  trained in basic arithmetic. Mammals will consistently discriminate 2 from 3 food pellets  or 10 from 15, although they will confuse 10 and 11. In short, mammals appear able to  discriminate quantity on a scale where equal increments are scaled logarithmically. This is  not surprising, as virtually all sensory systems convey information concerning the mag- nitude of relevant stimuli (e.g. brightness, loudness, pressure, etc.), but they do so  in accord with Weber's law, indicating an approximately logarithmic neural code for  stimulus intensity.  To explore the next steps in the evolution of mathematical capabilities it is necessary to  make a very important evolutionary observation. The invention of mathematics by the  human brain is certainly no older than the invention of writing, which occurred first in  Mesopotamia around 3000 B.C. and perhaps independently in Egypt around the same  time (Diamond, 1997). Furthermore, throughout world history until perhaps the past  half-century, the vast majority of the world's population has been both illiterate and  innumerate. Thus, there has neither been the time (only about 250 generations) nor the  evolutionary pressure for an explicit mathematical or reading capability to have evolved  in the brain (Donald, 1991). Strikingly, the earliest writing systems evolved from simple  accounting systems, that is from records of numbers; prose writing arose much later  284  Spikes, decisions, and actions  (Diamond, 1997). Given the obvious fact that I can write and you, the reader, can  comprehend the material in this book, only one plausible possibility remains. Math- ematical (and reading) capabilities must have arisen as a byproduct of evolutionary forces  that optimized certain brain areas for other functions.  Current evidence suggests that mathematical abilities are associated with the evolution  of eye-hand coordination and the manipulation of objects. There is much evidence, for  example, that both counting and the language of numbers are closely related to enu- meration of fingers and other body parts. Thus, all children begin counting by associating  objects with their fingers, and in certain societies body parts including toes, elbows, wrists,  and knees are used to count up to about 30 (Dehaene, 1997). The link with language is  witnessed by the fact that in at least one language the word for 10 literally means 'two  hands'.  A relationship between the visual manipulation of objects and the evolution of  mathematical ability is suggestively conveyed by recent studies of brain activation during  mathematical thinking. A PET (positron emission tomography) study has shown that  parts of human parietal cortex are most active during mental division (Dehaene et ai,  1996). In a second study, direct recording from parietal neurons in humans via electrodes 