embodied in the MatLab script Tritonia.m which uses neural equations from Chapters 9  and 10. With the /AHP current magnitude set to 1.62, the program produces the spike  trains plotted in Fig. 13.7 (it takes about 4 min). As with the experimental data in  Fig. 13.6B, brief stimulation of the DSIs leads to a repetitive series of bursts in which the  DSI and VSI cells fire in antiphase, while the C2 firing overlaps the DSI -VSI transition.  The experimental bursting data are over 10 times slower than the model (0.15 Hz versus  2.4 Hz), but this can be rectified by rescaling the time constants appropriately.  The network behavior raises two prima facie puzzling issues: (a) how do the DSIs  become re-excited after the cessation of VSI inhibition, and (b) why does activity cease  after a finite number of cycles (six in this case)? The answer to the first question is that the  model DSI generate very long duration EPSPs via their recurrent excitatory connections,  and this permits excitation to survive through the period of active inhibition by the VSI  cells, whose IPSPs are considerably shorter (see Fig. 13.7). Getting and Dekin (1985) have  reported that synaptic potentials in Tritonia vary in duration from 0.65 s up to 20.0 s, so a  model synaptic time constant Tsyn = 320 ms for the DSI-DS1 connections is certainly well  within range, even when the model is scaled by a factor of about 20. Bursting in the model  finally ceases as a result of the very slow increase in hyperpolarization mediated by an  /AHP current with a time constant TAHP = 1250 ms. This means that when the magnitude  of this current is sufficiently large (1.62 in this case), the resting state of the network is  always asymptotically stable, although it takes about 3000 ms for transient activity to die  out once the network is excited. This interplay between the duration of the DSI-DSI  50  o  C" -50  ยง  50  ro  C  0  CD  O  -50  50  0  -50  "I  r~  LIIIII  ^  IPSPs  111111  i  i  _i  i_  500  1000  1500  2000  Time (ms)  2500  3000  Fig. 13.7 Simulation of tritonia swimming network in Fig. 13.6A.  220  Spikes, decisions, and actions  recurrent excitation and the strength of the slow /AHP current is explored further in  Exercise 5.  A command neuron believed to drive the Fritonia swimming network has recently been  discovered (Frost and Katz, 1996; Frost et ai, 1997). As this neuron appears to receive  excitatory connections from C2 and inhibitory connections from the VSI cells, it bursts  along with the other neurons under physiological conditions. Thus, this cell could be  incorporated into the network quite easily, and the same principles would explain how it  becomes re-excited following inhibition.  13.6 Principles of central pattern generation  This chapter has attempted to fulfill the promise inherent in the title of this book by  integrating ion currents and spikes into an explanation of the behavior of an organism. In  doing so, several common principles of central pattern generator organization have  emerged. First, motor pattern generation emerges from a complex interplay between  intrinsic membrane properties of the constituent neurons and network properties defined  by their synaptic interconnections. As emphasized by Getting and Dekin (1985, p. 7) with  respect to Fritonia: 'Pattern generation... emerges as a property of the network as a  whole. No single cell nor synapse is capable, in isolation, of producing the oscillatory  burst pattern. Fhe ability of this network to generate patterned activity depends on the  interaction of both synaptic connectivity and the intrinsic cellular properties of each  neuron.' Our analysis has shown that the same is true of the lamprey segmental oscillator  and even of the two-neuron Clione swimming system.  Second, virtually all central pattern generators incorporate mutual inhibition between  the two half-centers controlling opposed sets of muscles. Fhis inhibition is present  between the DSI and VSI cells in Tritonia (see Fig. 13.6A) and between the left and right  halves of the lamprey segmental oscillator, where it is mediated by the C neurons (see Fig. 