events occurred at 25, 50, and 100 pm from the soma, and curves were computed using (15.27).  the figure, passive diffusion along the dendrite causes the potential change at the soma to  be much smaller and to peak later (0.25 ms for x = 25 urn; 3.0 ms for x = 100 urn) as the  distance from soma to synapse increases. As the length constant D = 100 pm in this  example, it is apparent that synapses located much farther than one length constant from  the soma will have a negligible effect in generating spikes (try running Dendrite.m with  x = 200 um). In fact, this analysis of passive dendrites using cable theory suggests that  synapses located more than one length constant from the soma will generally have only a  minor, subthreshold biasing effect on the excitability of the neuron. Conversely, synapses  close to the soma will have a very powerful and rapid effect on spike activity, which is  probably the reason that inhibitory GABA synapses are generally close to the somas of  cortical neurons (Colonneir, 1968; Scheibel and Scheibel, 1970). Cumulative effects of  multiple synaptic events at various locations are explored in Exercise 3.  15.5 Diffusion-reaction equations  The cable equation (15.5) is a linear partial differential equation describing passive dif- fusion of ions along dendrites. However, recent research has revealed that apical dendrites  of many neocortical and hippocampal pyramidal cells contain active, voltage-sensitive  ion channels (Stuart and Sakmann, 1994; Magee and Johnston, 1995; Johnston et ai,  1996), similar to those responsible for action potential propagation along axons. To  understand active propagation along axons and dendrites, it is necessary to consider  nonlinear diffusion processes. Let us therefore consider the simplest nonlinear general- ization of (15.5):  dV  , d2V  T ~  = D2^T  +  F(V)  dt  dx2  (15.28)  262  Spikes, decisions, and actions  Fhis is just the linear diffusion equation with a general term F(V) added. The simple case  where F(V) = -V is just the cable equation (15.5). If F(V) is nonlinear, however, eqn  (15.28) is called a diffusion-reaction equation, and striking new phenomena can emerge.  This name implies that diffusion of V across space triggers local nonlinear chemical (or  ionic) reactions characterized by F( V). In an axon, for example, we shall see that F( V) can  describe the voltage-dependent opening of Na+ channels. Diffusion-reaction systems  can also involve several equations of the form (15.28), each describing the diffusion of a  different chemical or ion that reacts with the diffusing substances described by the other  equations.  As with most other nonlinear dynamical problems, the diffusion-reaction equation  (15.28) can seldom be solved analytically. Nevertheless, we are frequently interested in the  existence of particular types of solutions. One diffusion -reaction solution of particular  importance is a traveling wave that propagates with constant velocity and shape, such as  an action potential along an unmyelinated axon. Denoting position by A, time by ?, and  propagation velocity by v, a solution to (15.28) F(.v. ?) is a traveling wave if:  F(.Y, ?) = F(.v±r?)  (15.29)  The function on the right side is of constant shape but shifts its position to the left or right  with time depending on whether it is a function of (A + v?) or (x — vt).  Under what conditions will a diffusion-reaction equation have traveling wave solu- tions of the form (15.29)7 The answer is obtained by defining a new variable ~  z = x+vt  (15.30)  The transformation of variables defined by (15.30) has the effect of placing us in a  coordinate frame that is moving at exactly the speed of the propagating wave that we wish  to study. (Note that z = x - vt could also be used.) You might wonder what constant  velocity v should be chosen in defining z. The appropriate v will be seen to emerge from an  analysis of the diffusion-reaction equation if any solutions of the form (15.29) exist.  To see how transformation to the variable z simplifies the problem of finding traveling  wave solutions to the diffusion-reaction equation, notice first that (15.30) transforms the  partial derivatives with respect to space and time as follows:  dV  dV 