lines), and they are separated by an unstable saddle point (dashed line), as was found in  (6.12) and Fig. 6.4. If we begin stimulating the network with K< A and increase K, the  network will remain in the lower or resting steady state throughout the AB range. If,  however, we begin stimulation with K> B and decrease K, the network will stay in the  upper asymptotically stable state as K traverses the region AB. Thus, over the stimulus  range A < K < B, the equilibrium state that the system is in depends on the previous history  of stimulation. Furthermore, if Kis varied slowly back and forth across the range shown in  the diagram, the neural response will trace out the loop shown by the arrows in the figure.  This is known as a hysteresis loop.  Let us consider in more detail the reasons that this memory network exhibits hysteresis.  When K=A. the unstable saddle point coalesces with the upper asymptotically stable  equilibrium, and the two vanish when K< A. Similarly, when K= B, the lower asymp- totically stable state and the saddle point state coalesce, and both vanish when K>B.  This appearance or disappearance of a pair of equilibria is known as a bifurcation,  which literally means a splitting in two. At a bifurcation point two equilibrium points (or  one equilibrium and one nonlinear oscillation, see Chapter 8) are either created together,  or else they merge and vanish together. The mathematical reason that a bifurcation  always involves the creation or disappearance of a pair of steady states is that two roots of  CD w  c o  D- (/>  CD  tx  CD  1 00  8 0  6 0  4 0  2 0  0  - 2 0  1  I  '  I  '  I  '  I  '  I  '  Asymptotically Stable  \  Unstable  Asymptotically Stable  J  I  I  I  I  .  I  I  I  L _ l _  B  - 5 0 - 4 0 - 3 0 - 2 0 - 1 0  0  1 0  2 0  3 0  Stimulus K  Fig. 6.5 Hysteresis loop and bifurcations generated by (6.8) in the presence of stimulus AT in (6.13). Between A  and B two steady states are asymptotically stable nodes, while the intervening one is an unstable saddle point. If K  is swept back and forth across range AB, the system will trace out the hysteresis loop shown by the arrows.  Nonlinear neurodynamics and bifurcations  81  (6.13) become complex valued at the bifurcation point and therefore no longer exist on the  real plane. Although bifurcations involving two equilibrium points always occur in an  asymptotically stable-unstable pair, we shall see in Chapter 8 that there are bifurcations  of oscillatory solutions from steady states as well.  Hysteresis is the mathematical basis of the short-term memory capacity of this two- neuron network. The system will remain in the lower asymptotically stable equilibrium  where neither neuron is firing until there is a stimulus K> B, after which the neural  response will rapidly jump to the upper asymptotically stable state as depicted by the  vertical arrow at B in Fig. 6.5. This constitutes triggering of the network's short-term  memory. If the stimulus is now turned off, so K = 0, the neurons will remain in the upper  asymptotically stable state and thus continue to fire, because the upper state exists and is  asymptotically stable for K = 0. Thus, the network 'remembers' via hysteresis that a  relevant stimulus has occurred. To shut the network off, there must be a negative or  inhibitory stimulus (K < A < 0) to erase the short-term memory activity once triggered.  This is hysteresis in short-term memory.  6.6 Adaptation, forgetting, and catastrophe theory  The short-term memory network in (6.8) has a physiological shortcoming: after the  network has been triggered to its active state, both E neurons will continue to fire at a rate  of 80 spikes/s until the response is actively inhibited. In the absence of such inhibition,  activity will continue forever. So, the network does not incorporate the physiological fact  that neurons (like muscles) slowly adapt or fatigue when they continue to fire at high rates 