incremental responses for A = 1, 10, 100, 1000, and 105. Now run a second series for  background adaptation toL= 1000 and increments A = 10, 100, 1000, and 105. Plot your  results on log-log coordinates. How does the ganglion cell response change as the level of  background light adaptation increases?  5. The following equations might be obtained as a linearized approximation to nonlinear  dynamical equations of the form (7.22):  dF  ~d7  d/  . 5  d?  £+1.5 /  exp(-|.v - A-'|)Fd.Y' -j  j  expH-v -  x'\/4)Idx'  J-3C  ^J-X  21 + 1 T  eXP("|A' ~ Y'l/4)£dv' - 4~/X e xP (-' v - Y'l/4)/d.Y'  Analyze the stability of these equations with respect to spatial perturbations of frequency  u> by utilizing (7.27) and (7.28). What are the eigenvalues for u> ~ 0 and w= oc? Using the  MatLab eig() function, determine the range of spatial frequencies u for which the equa- tions are unstable.  8  Nonlinear oscillations  The study of nonlinear dynamical systems in the last two chapters has enabled us to  analyze rather complex neural networks in terms of the stability of their equilibrium  states. However, we have yet to consider one of the most exciting and important topics in  all of dynamical systems theory: nonlinear oscillations. Indeed, nonlinear oscillations, or  rhythms, are ubiquitous in living organisms. Circadian rhythms, cardiac rhythms, hor- monal cycles, the rhythms of breathing and locomotion (walking, running, swimming):  all are of the essence of life. Not only are many of these rhythms generated by neural  networks, but we shall shortly see that even the generation of action potentials in single  neurons is the result of inherently nonlinear oscillations.  In linear systems the only possible oscillations involve sines and cosines. These linear  oscillations form closed circular or elliptical trajectories around an equilibrium point that  is a center. Furthermore, if the initial conditions are changed even slightly, the result is a  neighboring oscillatory solution with the same form in the phase plane but a different  amplitude. No other type of oscillation is possible in a linear system, regardless of whether  it has two or two thousand dimensions. In the nervous system and other biological sys- tems, there is always some degree of noise resulting from physiological or environmental  fluctuations. Such noise would continuously alter the amplitude of a linear oscillation,  causing it to wander around the state space rather aimlessly. Clearly, such a sloppy linear  oscillation could not control one's breathing or heartbeat very effectively. As we shall see,  nonlinear oscillations arc largely immune to this noise problem. For this reason alone, it is  safe to conclude that biological rhythms evolved to be inherently nonlinear. To even begin  to understand the rhythms of life and the nervous system, it is thus essential to study  nonlinear oscillations.  8.1  Limit cycles  Let us start discussion of nonlinear oscillations with the definition of an oscillation itself.  A trajectory X(t) of a dynamical system with any number of dimensions is an oscillation if:  X(T+t)  = X(t)  for sonic unique T > 0 and all ?.  (8.1)  This states that the system will always return to exactly the same state after time T, and Fis  therefore called the period of the oscillation. Note that if (8.1) is true for T, it will also be  true for /VTwhere N is any integer > 0, so the period is defined to be the minimum Tfor  which (X. 1) is holds. Also, the requirement that 7'be unique excludes equilibrium points.  Nonlinear oscillations  117  for which (8.1) would otherwise hold. The reciprocal of F, 1 jT, is termed the frequency of  the oscillation. Note that (8.1) applies to linear systems as well as nonlinear.  If a linear system is periodic, there are infinitely many periodic solutions within any  small neighborhood of a given oscillation: as the solution is a sum of sines and cosines, an  oscillation of any amplitude whatsoever is a solution. (The amplitude is, of course,  determined by the initial conditions.) Nonlinear systems can also produce analogous  oscillations, but this is rare in biological systems. Of vastly greater significance is the fact  that nonlinear systems can generate isolated oscillations that are surrounded by open, 