for the diffusion length constant D = 0.25mm, r = 1.47mm/ms,orl.47m/s, a reason- able value for unmyelinated axons. Similarly, A = 16.16. These values were used in  plotting the isoclines and heteroclinic trajectory in Fig. 15.5.  Substitution of the values above into (15.38) provides an explicit solution for W. Recall,  however, that W = d V/dz from (15.34), where z = x + vt. Thus, the equation for V(z) is:  dJ-=-A(y-r)(y-h)  (15.41)  dr  The solution to this equation can be found in standard integral tables (Gradshteyn and  Ryzhik, 1980) and involves the hyperbolic tangent (tanh):  F = , + ^ ( l + t a n h ^ - y + V ? m  (15.42)  where A and v are given by (15.40), and x + vt has been substituted for z. This is an  analytical solution for the leading edge and velocity of the action potential produced by  (15.33). Depending upon whether A and Tare positive or negative, the wave moves to the  left or right. In front of the wave, V = r, the resting potential, while after the wave passes  V = h, the maximum wave height (see Fig. 15.6).  To summarize, we have used Theorem 17 to prove that the Hodgkin-Huxley  approximation in (15.33) will produce spikes that travel with constant velocity and shape  along an axon. The leading edge of these propagating spikes is a traveling wave solution to  the diffusion-reaction equation. As a check on the accuracy of the solution in (15.42), it is  interesting to compare it with a simulation of the full diffusion-reaction system in (15.33).  Before doing so. however, a brief digression on numerical methods is in order.  Simulations of diffusion-reaction equations depend on numerical methods derived  from Taylor series approximations in ways analogous to those developed in Chapter 5.  Expanding the diffusion reaction equation (15.28) to lowest order in both partial deri- vatives, as in Euler's method, produces the formula:  F(A,? +  A ? ) = F ( A , ? ) + ^ ( D ^ ^ ^ ^  T {  (Ax)  J  (15.43)  where A? and A.v are the temporal and spatial intervals between adjacent points. The  expression on the right divided by (Ax) is just the discrete approximation to the spatial  second partial derivative. As discussed by Press et al. (1986), it is necessary (although not  always sufficient in nonlinear problems) that A? and A.v be chosen to satisfy the following  Diffusion and dendrites  267  inequality in order for the simulations to converge to meaningful results:  2AtD:  r(A.v)-r < 1  15.44)  Although it is easy in principle to choose values of A.v and A? satisfying (15.44), in practice  this may result in an extremely large number of very small time steps and a very long time  for computation. More complex approximation methods that partially alleviate this  problem are developed by Press et al. (1986), and the interested reader is referred to that  treatment.  The diffusion-reaction equation for action potential propagation (15.33) has been  simulated in MatLab script Spike_Propagate.m using the approximation method in  (15.43). Parameter values were r = 0.8 ms from (15.33), D = 0.25 mm as in the analytical  solution above, Ax = 0.08 mm, and A? = 0.01 ms. Zero flux boundary conditions were  used in the simulation. Running the script will produce an animated solution of a spike  that propagates from left to right as a result of initial depolarization at the left end of the  axon. By changing the site of the initial depolarization it is possible to explore effects of  initial depolarization at the axon center or at both ends at once (the spikes annihilate when  they meet). The simulated action potential is compared with the analytical form for the  leading edge in Fig. 15.6. The analytical solution is extremely accurate almost to the peak  of the spike, where R (i.e. K+ conductance) truncates the simulated spike and leads to the  recovery phase. Spike velocity in the simulation is 1.33 m/s, which is about 10% slower 