one eigenvalue is positive, all saddle points are unstable. As illustrated in Fig. 3.3, tra- jectories approach a saddle point along one axis (y in this example) but diverge from it  along a different axis (x in this case). Typical equations generating a saddle point are:  dt\y) = \0 -3JU  solution:  (3.27)  x(t) =0.8e2' + 0.2e~3'  y(t) = e -3;  The final possibility is that the pair of eigenvalues are pure imaginary, and this con- dition defines a center. Euler's formula (1.15) in this case dictates that all trajectories must  be a sum of a sine and a cosine of the same frequency. Because of this, all trajectories  around a center will be strictly periodic oscillations. Because any periodic function repeats  itself, phase space trajectories around a center will always be closed circular or ellipsoidal  40  Spikes, decisions, and actions  shapes like those plotted in the lower right of Fig. 3.3. A typical example of a system  with a center is:  £CMX)e:  solution :  (3-28)  .Y(?) =cos(3?) -0.33sin(3?)  y(t) = cos(3?) + 1.33sin(3?)  As the nature of the solutions and their stability are determined by the eigenvalues of  the characteristic equation, all trajectories for all possible initial conditions will have the  same qualitative behavior in any given linear system. However, this holds true only for  linear systems, and it must be qualified when nonlinear systems are discussed. Indeed, the  power and elegance of phase space representations can only be fully appreciated in  nonlinear dynamics.  3.5  Critical damping and muscle contraction  Theorem 2 covers all possible second order linear differential equations except for one:  the case where both roots of the characteristic equation are identical. The case of two  identical roots is generally called critical damping for historical reasons deriving from  physics. Critical damping is an exceptional case, as the probability that the coefficients of  the characteristic equation, if chosen at random, would generate identical eigenvalues is  zero. Nevertheless, it is easy to construct mathematical examples in which the two  eigenvalues are identical, and these will be solved now. Physiologically, critical dampingis  significant because it represents the simplest approximation to the dynamics of muscle  contraction. In addition, the cascades of equations treated in the previous chapter are  another case of critical damping (because the time constants of all stages are identical).  Let us motivate critical damping by considering a simple model of muscle contraction.  Figure 3.4 plots data on the force generated by a cat soleus muscle as a function of length  at two different levels of motorneuron activation (Rack and Westbury, 1969). Although  the overall curves are nonlinear, above an equilibrium length, XQ, the force generated is  nearly linear over the considerable range indicated by the solid lines. No force is generated  for .v < XQ, a state where the muscle is relaxed. The equilibrium length shifts to smaller  values as the level of motorneuron activity increases. Neural specification of XQ is  believed to be the way in which the central nervous system determines the desired length  and force exerted by each muscle in the body, and this is termed the 'equilibrium point  hypothesis'. Over the linear range, the force of contraction is of the form Q2(.Y - Xo),  where the length of the muscle vis always assumed to be greater than or equal to.v0.The  force of contraction is generated as actin-myosin bonds are formed, after which a con- ftgurational change in the myosin head causes the muscle fiber to shorten (see Rothwell,  1994). There is also some frictional resistance to contraction within the muscle due to the  Two-dimensional systems  41  2.5  O  o  u.  2 [  1.5  1 - 0.5  — O - 5 Spikes/sec  — • - -1  "  I ' I i I  1  1.5  2.5  3  3.5  4  Length (cm)  4.5  Fig. 3.4 Force generated by cat soleus muscle as a function of muscle length in centimeters (reproduced with  permission, Rack and Westbury, 1969). Changing the driving spike frequency from 5 to 10 Hz shifts the linear  portion (solid lines) of the force curve to shorter lengths. The stimulating spike rate determines xQ, the 