three patterns. As you will discover by running the script, the network recalls the face to  active working memory in response to an appropriate noisy input, but it settles into a limit  cycle replaying the learned temporal sequence when the input is related to any one of  the patterns in that sequence. The spatial neural activity states in the three patterns of  the dynamic sequence successively spell MO-VE-A2, which may be construed as the  neural code for either a skilled muscular movement or a particular movement in a  musical piece.  248  Spikes, decisions, and actions  The dynamical basis for the stored limit cycle MO-VE-A2 is quite easy to understand.  The symmetric synaptic connections among active neurons in each individual pattern  serve to make it temporarily asymptotically stable in the same manner as each of the  patterns in the CA3 network above. After a time delay, however, these neurons activate  neurons in the next pattern of the sequence via asymmetric connections and cause them to  begin firing. Recurrent inhibition in the network mediated by the G neuron now becomes  sufficiently strong to set up a competition between the previous and current neural pat- terns, and the latter wins because of its additional delayed stimulation by the former. This  sequence of events is shown in Fig. 14.9, where the response of a neuron unique to each  pattern in the sequence is plotted. Fhus, the limit cycle encoded in this dynamical memory  operates via a sequence of bifurcations in which the asymptotic stability of each stored  pattern is ultimately destroyed by competition with the next pattern that it triggers fol- lowing a delay. (You can increase the competition and make the transitions between  patterns in the dynamic memory more abrupt by increasing the value of the inhibitory  gain to g — 0.11, but this does produce too much inhibition for the static pattern stored in  memory to remain stable.)  Fhe autoassociative memory models above incorporate the basic features of excitatory  and inhibitory interactions that were developed in Chapters 6 and 7. The recurrent  excitatory connections in the CA3 model are the product oflearning according to a Hebb  rule for synaptic modification. They cooperatively reinforce firing of other neurons in a  pattern, which results in pattern completion, recall, and maintenance of the pattern in  short-term memory. Inclusion of additional synapses with delays leads to a stored limit  cycle in which a sequence of bifurcations result as each stored dynamic pattern loses a  winner-take-all competition (mediated by the inhibitory cell) to its successor. Hertz et al.  (1989) have shown that inclusion of synapses with multiple delays leads to a quite  sophisticated dynamic memory. More detailed models of motor memory (Lukashin  et ai, 1996) and hippocampal dynamics (Samsonovich and McNaughton. 1997) have  recently been developed using similar basic principles. Lyapunov functions provide the  rr  a.  CO  200  400  600  Time (ms)  800  1000  Fig. 14.9 Limit cycle response of three neurons in the dynamic memory program DynamicMemory.m. Each  neuron is active in only one of the three patterns in the memory cycle (MO. VE, or A2).  Lyapunov functions and memory  249  mathematical basis for understanding how all these networks achieve their memory  storage capabilities.  14.7 Exercises  1. Determine which of the following functions U are positive definite state functions of a  system defined on the (A,V) phase plane. Assume that the system has a singularity at the  origin. For each function that is positive definite, determine the region R within which this  property holds:  <7 = A2 + xy + y2  U = 3x2 + 4y2 - y3  U = 10.v4+.Yy+ 10y4  2. Consider the following dynamical system:  d.v  =  d?  dy  d? "  i  — A"  -2y  +  - s  y  xV  Prove that the function U below is a Lyapunov function for the singularity at the origin.  Based upon U, estimate the domain of asymptotic stability.  4  4  4  4  3. Consider the following linear negative feedback system:  ^ = - 3 A + 2V  d?  d.v  ,  — = V - 2A- d?  '  Use Theorem 14 to find a Lyapunov function and prove that the domain of asymptotic  stability is the entire {x, y) phase plane. (Note: you will have to find an appropriate range 