find only one. The goal is to help you understand state space and the various types of  equilibria.)  dX  f -2 a  d? " V 5  b  3. At low light levels the parameter values of the retinal cones change and the feed- back from the horizontal cells becomes weaker. A modified version of (3.20) that is  appropriate for low light conditions is:  A (~*  1  — = —  (-C-0.5H+L)  d?  TC  d?  TH  with TC = 100 ms and TH = 500 ms. Solve for the steady state as a function of L. Now  obtain an exact solution for L = 3 and the initial conditions C(0) = 0, H(0) = 0.  Two-dimensional systems  47  4. Solve (3.29) for the motor control of a saccadic eye movement through an angle of 30°.  In particular, let A0 = 29 mm, x(0) = 35 mm, and a = 0.1. Write down the explicit solution  and plot the result for 0 < ? < 150 ms.  5. The equation below describes a critically damped spring model of muscle contraction,  with A'o as the equilibrium length specified by the central nervous system:  d.v  d7 = v  dv  1 /  d? ~T I  (-V-A-o)  T  Obtain the exact solution of these equations for r = 0.08 s and x0 = 4 mm given the initial  conditions x(0) = 7 mm, v(0) = 0. (Hint: first convert the equation back to a single  second order differential equation.)  6. Solve the following equation with forcing function 3?2 for ,v(?):  d2.v  . dx  c  -rr + 5 — -f 6x = 3r  d?2  d?  The initial conditions are A(0) = 1 and d.v(0)/d? = 0. Plot the solution for 0 < ? < 2.  Higher dimensional linear systems  Our goal in theoretical neuroscience is to be able to describe and analyze systems  with many components, be they neurons, dendrites, or ionic currents. The material in  Chapters 2 and 3 has enabled us to examine systems with one or two components, such as  the feedback circuit related to retinal cones. Fortunately, we now have all the background  needed to generalize to linear systems with an arbitrarily large number of components.  The reason for this is that all possible types of solutions found in high order linear systems  with constant coefficients are simple generalizations of the solutions of second order  systems.  In dealing with higher order systems, it is generally not possible to find all of the  eigenvalues of the system analytically, because polynomial equations beyond fourth  order do not have general analytical solutions. Fortunately, MatLab provides fast and  accurate numerical approximations to the eigenvalues of quite large systems. Further- more, we shall sometimes be interested only in whether or not all eigenvalues have  negative real parts, as negative real parts guarantee that the steady state is asymptotically  stable. There is a very powerful criterion due to Routh and Hurwitz that tests for negative  real parts.  The Routh-Hurwitz criterion can also be used to determine the strength of synaptic  connections to guarantee that a neural network will generate oscillations. This can be  extremely valuable when we know from physiology experiments that a network does  oscillate, yet we lack detailed quantitative information on the synaptic weights. The same  approach also elucidates the effect of delays in neural feedback loops, which can some- times produce undesirable oscillations possibly related to some forms of motor control  disorders.  4.1 Solutions of A^th order linear systems  Let us consider a system of A' interacting neurons or N ionic species. If the interactions are  linear, the system can always be described by a differential equation in normal form:  d.V  - - This can be solved in the same manner as was used in deriving Theorem 2. namely,  by substituting a vector of exponentials and then solving the resulting characteristic  Higher dimensional systems  49  equation. This approach leads to the following theorem:  Theorem 4: The solution to the TVth order differential equation (4.1) is obtained by  finding the N roots. A; to XN, of the characteristic equation:  M - A / | = O  where /is the identity matrix. The components of the solution vector are then of  the form:  5>e*" 