that the reader has some understanding of springs, gravitation, etc. The examples I shall  choose assume a basic knowledge of neuron morphology (axon, soma, synapse, etc.) and  physiology (ion channels, resting potentials, action potentials) at the level offered by the  books above.  For reference, a microscope drawing of a cortical neuron from Cajal (1911) is presented  in Fig. 1.2. Briefly, other neurons make localized contacts with this particular neuron at  chemical synapses located throughout the dendrites (or dendritic tree) and also on the cell  body or soma. These synapses may be either excitatory (electrically depolarizing) or  inhibitory (generally electrically hyperpolarizing). Electrical changes produced at all the  synapses that are simultaneously active then propagate to the soma, thus producing a net  postsynaptic potential. If the postsynaptic potential at the soma is sufficiently large to  Soma  (cell body)  Axon  hillock  Dendrites  Fig. 1.2 Diagram of a cortical pyramidal cell from Cajal (1911). Dendrites (thick processes) emanate from  the soma or cell body and are the site of synaptic contacts from other neurons. The thin axon is connected to  the soma at the axon hillock, which is the site of action potential generation. Axons typically have many  branches (several shown) and may cover very long distances before they contact other nerve cells at synapses.  10  Spikes, decisions, and actions  Fig. 1.3  Diagram of a two-neuron negative feedback network. Throughout the book excitatory synapses  will be indicated by arrowheads, and inhibitory synapses will be indicated by solid circles.  exceed a threshold value, typically a depolarization of 10-15 millivolts (mV), the neuron  generates a brief electrical pulse, known as a spike or action potential at its axon hillock.  The axon hillock is the point of connection between the soma and the axon, which is a long  thin process leading off from the soma and ultimately terminating in synapses on other  neurons. Axons range in length from less than one millimeter to almost a meter,  depending on the location and identity of the particular neuron. Spikes generated at the  axon hillock subsequently propagate down the axon and produce chemical signals at  the synapses. Depending on the level of activation, neurons can fire spikes at rates  varying from less than one per second up to around 1000 per second (1000 Hz). This  extremely brief synopsis can be fleshed out by examining the relevant chapters in any of  the references cited above. Many of these neural events will be analyzed in dynamical  terms later in this book.  Many examples in the book involve interactions among several neurons in a network.  In these cases a diagram will frequently be provided to help interpret the mathematical  equations. Such diagrams follow the conventions illustrated in Fig. 1.3. This figure shows  a simple feedback circuit between two neurons. Here the excitatory neuron E sends an  axon collateral (arrow) to stimulate the inhibitory neuron I. This neuron in turn provides  feedback inhibition to E. Throughout the book excitatory synapses will be represented by  arrowheads, and inhibitory synapses by solid circles.  1.5  Scope and plan of book  Given the background outlined above, this book has the goal of developing those skills  that are essential in applying nonlinear dynamics to problems in neurobiology. Thus,  Spikes, decisions, and actions is intended to provide the mathematical background for  works such as Methods in Neuronal Modeling by Koch and Segev (1989). While this may  be an ambitious goal, it is my belief that a carefully selected and coherent body of  mathematical theory can provide the basis for understanding the vast majority of  techniques employed by contemporary neural theorists. In order to provide this core  of mathematical theory as concisely as possible, many topics typically taught in  undergraduate courses in differential equations have been omitted. The instructor or  advanced reader will note that there is no discussion of equations with time-varying  coefficients or Laplace transforms. However, this does not reduce the utility of the book  for neuroscientists. Laplace transforms have little relevance to nonlinear dynamical  Introduction  11  systems. Time-varying parameters, however, are really a version of nonlinear dynamics in  disguise. The time variation may always be rewritten using multiplicative variables that  satisfy their own differential equations. For example:  d.v  1  — = -  x  (1.17)  d?  1 +?  v  '  is equivalent to the system of equations:  d.v  d 7 = v v  dy  2 