oscillations. Recall that with an inhibitory strength of - 10 in (4.2) the origin was found to  be an asymptotically stable spiral point, and therefore no oscillations could occur. Let us  now treat the inhibitory synaptic strength as an unknown parameter designated by -g  (for gain). Now (4.2) may be rewritten as:  (4.6)  How can we solve for g so that an oscillation results? Referring to Theorem 7, we see that  this will occur if the second Routh-Hurwitz determinant A2 = 0. The lower order  determinants must, of course, be greater than zero, or the equilibrium point will be  unstable. To carry out the computation, we would first determine the coefficients of the  characteristic equation for (4.6) and then form the Routh-Hurwitz determinants. Finally,  5  7  g  ~g  - 5  7  7 \  -*)  - 5 /  (Ei  \E2 U  Higher dimensional systems  53  -10  Fig. 4.1 A cyclical three-neuron network in which each neuron excites the next and is inhibited by the  previous neuron.  we would have to solve the algebraic equation for A2 = 0 to find the value of g that causes  oscillations.  Fortunately, all of this tedious calculation can be done using MatLab script Routh_  Hurwitz.m. Before using Routh_Hurwitz.m, it is first necessary to type the coefficients of  the A matrix into the function Hopf.m (representing the unknown as G), and then save this  function. Now run Routh_Hurwitz.m, and you will be prompted for a 'Guess' or first  approximation at the solution, which should be a positive real number in this case. The  program first finds a value of G that causes the Routh-Hurwitz determinant A#-i = 0 to  satisfy Theorem 7. The value is G = 17 in this case. The Routh_Hurwitz.m script then uses  this G value in the A matrix to calculate all of the Routh-Hurwitz determinants and find  the eigenvalues. Finally, it indicates whether the equilibrium point is asymptotically  stable, unstable, or a center. In this example, the eigenvalues are -15 and ± 20.78i, so the  neural responses all have the general form:  Ek = /le-15' + 5cos(20.78?) + Csin(20.78?)  (4.7)  where k = 1,2, 3. So the solution to (4.6), which is described in a three-dimensional state  space, decays onto a two-dimensional surface within that space where the solution  oscillates sinusoidally. Note that the frequency of this oscillation is reported in radians;  conversion to Hz requires division by 2-7T. Thus, Theorem 7 has been used to determine  the inhibitory synaptic strength that will cause oscillations in the network depicted in  Fig. 4.1.  4.3 Oscillatory control of respiration  Oscillations abound in the neural control of movements. Walking, running, and swim- ming are all governed by networks of motorneurons that generate periodic responses  causing the various muscles involved to contract in an appropriate and repetitive  sequence. Here we shall examine a neural oscillation that most of us take for granted: the  control of respiration. Anatomical and physiological data (Cohen, 1968) suggest that  respiration might be controlled by a mutually inhibitory network similar to that illu- strated in Fig. 4.2. Neuron 1 in this network inhibits neurons 2 and 3 but has no effect on  54  Spikes, decisions, and actions  Fig. 4.2 Four-neuron network for respiratory control involving sequential neural disinhibition,  neuron 4, from which it receives inhibition. These interactions are repeated for the other  neurons. This is a sequential network that involves inhibition but also disinhibition. To  appreciate this, note that inhibition of neurons 2 and 3 by neuron 1 shuts off all inhibition  to neuron 4.  To analyze this network and determine the inhibitory strengths that will produce a  respiratory oscillation, let us assume that the inhibitory synaptic weights between adja- cent neurons are - 5 and that each neural response will decay to zero at a rate of -3 in the  absence of stimulation. What strength —g must the diagonal inhibition in the network  have to generate periodic behavior? The system of four coupled linear neural equations is:  d  d? 