ance. A high-frequency sine wave stimulus may be regarded as similar to a periodic train  of pulses. When the stimulus frequency is too high, one or more pulses will occur within  the phase range after each spike where spike triggering cannot occur. Other pulses,  however, may be expected to occur at phases where they trigger an early spike. The  combination of these two factors can cause both synchronization and subharmonic  resonance.  9.7 Morris-Leear equations  In addition to eqns (9.3), (9.7), and (9.10), a number of additional two-equation models  for action potential generation have been developed, including those by Hindmarsh and  Rose (1982), Kepler et al. (1992), and Morris and Lecar (1981). Due to an excellent  analysis of the Morris-Lecar equations by Rinzel and Ermentrout (1989), these equations  have become popular among neural theorists. Accordingly, I shall present them briefly  here and relegate an exploration of their properties to the Exercises. The normalized or  dimensionless form of these equations presented here is obtained by dividing all voltages  by the equilibrium potential for the excitatory ion (Ca2+ in the original model or Na+  when applied to squid or cortical neurons) and scaling time appropriately (Rinzel and  Ermentrout, 1989). The resulting Morris-Lecar equations are:  -_" = -g(V)(V  - 1.0)-2/v(F+0.7)-0.5(F+0.5) + /  d *  °-2>-R  + G(V))  dt  TR(V)  1  g(-V^  l+exp(-(K+0.01)/0.075)  ( 9 ' U )  G(V)  1 +exp(-(F-0.1)/0.07)  r R ( F ) =cosh((F-0.1)/0.14)  The first two equations have the same form as (9.4) except for the explicit addition of a  leakage conductance term, -0.5(K+ 0.5). The transcendental expressions forg(F) and  G(V) are logistic functions, which are just scaled and shifted hyperbolic tangents. Finally,  154  Spikes, decisions, and actions  the time constant rR varies with V, being smallest when V = 0.1. The Morris-Lecar  equations are implemented in MatLab script Morris_Lecar.m, and their properties are  explored in the Exercises. The dynamical behavior of (9.11) with the constants given is  very similar to (9.10).  9.8  Exercises  1. Use the Poincare-Bendixon theorem to prove the existence of limit cycles for eqn (9.7)  with / = 0.5. Determine the stability of the steady state and then construct an appropriate  closed curve in the phase plane through which all trajectories must pass to complete the  proof. Show an accurate graph of your construction.  2. When the K* concentration outside a neuron gets too high, the equilibrium potential  £k becomes less negative. Prove that the resting state for / = 0 of eqn (9.7) can become  unstable under these conditions for a range of Eft, values. (Note that £K = —0.92 in the  equation; you must replace this with a parameter.) Simulate this situation to show that  spike trains are generated. This is one possible mechanism for the inception of neural  activity in visual cortex during migraine auras. What happens if £K increases even more?  3. Prove the existence of a limit cycle for eqn (9.10) with / = 0.2. You should use the  Poincare-Bendixon approach. This case is a bit more complex than Exercise 1.  4. Determine the value of / for which eqn (9.10) exhibits a Hopf bifurcation. Is this a  supercritical or a subcritical bifurcation?  5. The bifurcation diagram in Fig. 9.6 shows the presence of an unstable limit cycle  for eqn (9.7) when / = 0.068. To explore further consequences of this, use program  PhaseShift.m with ConstStim = 0.068 (it is 0.15 in the program). First verify that a pulse  with amplitude = 1.0 presented at ? = 4.0 ms, will terminate the spike train. You have just  shut off all neural activity with a depolarizing pulse! Now vary the amplitude and timing  of your pulse to estimate the range over which termination rather than phase shifting 