might be possible to study the dynamics of such current separation in a truly minimal  compartmental model with just two compartments. This reasoning led Rinzel and col- leagues to develop a series of elegant two-compartment models for a variety of complex  neural phenomena (Pinsky and Rinzel, 1994; Booth and Rinzel, 1995; Li et ai, 1996;  Booth et ai, 1997). The basic anatomy of these models, consisting of a soma plus one  dendritic compartment coupled by conductance gc, is illustrated in Fig. 15.9. One of  the most fascinating of these models provides a dynamical analysis of plateau potentials  and bistability in motorneurons (Booth and Rinzel, 1995; Booth et ai, 1997), so let us  develop it here.  For years it was believed that motorneurons did little more than receive synaptic input  and send axons to muscle fibers, where arriving spikes produced contraction, thus  functioning as the 'final common pathway' controlling muscle activity. More recently,  v D  Dendrite  'Ca & >AHP  Soma  (Na & lK  Fig. 15.9 A two-compartment neuron with ion channels distributed as indicated. The conductance between  channels is gc.  Diffusion and dendrites  273  however, it has been discovered that individual motorneurons possess membrane prop- erties that provide them with a form of short-term memory! The basis for this is a Ca2 +  current present in the dendrites that can be switched between a low or 'off state and a  higher or 'on' state, the latter generating a plateau potential (Hounsgaard et ai, 1988;  Elken and Kiehn, 1989; Kiehn, 1991). The Ca2 + plateau potential can be switched on by  brief depolarization of the neuron, as is shown by the data from a cat spinal motorneuron  in Fig. 15.10 (Hounsgaard et ai, 1988). Here brief depolarization sufficient to drive the  neuron at a high rate results in continuing activity at a steady rate after the excitation has  stopped. The ongoing activity continues until terminated by a subsequent hyperpolar- izing pulse. Thus, brief excitation can switch on a plateau potential that maintains a  roughly constant depolarization of the neuron until actively inhibited. Eken and Kiehn  (1989) have suggested that plateau potentials may function as a local motor memory while  an animal maintains a stable posture. Such bistable firing behavior suggests that the Ca" +  current dynamics of this neuron must generate a hysteresis loop of the sort studied in  Chapter 6.  The two-compartment model for plateau potentials incorporates four ion currents:  the Na+ and K+ currents involved in spike generation in the soma, and /j-type Ca" +  plus slow /AHP currents in the dendritic compartment (see Fig. 15.9). Coupling between  the two compartments involves two factors: an intercompartmental conductance gc,  and a factor p representing the proportion of total neural membrane in the soma.  The factor p is important, because the dendrites typically have a significantly larger  membrane area than the soma with the result that current exchange between the two  compartments can have unequal effects. The equations for this two-compartment  model thus become:  dF  Pr  C — = - / N a - / K + / + — (VD-  V)  d?  p  d Fn  ec  CD — ~ = -/ C a - /AHP + — (V- FD)  d?  p  15.48)  50 mV  |l0nA  5s  Fig. 15.10 Effect of plateau potentials in a motorneuron (reproduced with permission. Hounsgaard et al,  1988). A brief depolarizing pulse switches the neuron on, and firing is maintained until a hyperpolarizing pulse  switches the neuron off again. Once switched on, the neural activity is self-sustaining due to depolarization by  a plateau potential.  274  Spikes, decisions, and actions  As with all compartment models, it is necessary to define a new potential variable FD for  the dendritic compartment. Fhe actual equations used in the plateau potential model are  derived from (9.10) for the Na+ and K+ currents and adapted from (10.5) for the Ca2 +  and /AHp currents. The two equations for the soma are identical to (15.46) (except for the  change in the coupling term to the form in 15.48), so only the equations for the dendritic 