hours or even days in the hippocampus (Bliss and Collingridge, 1993). Although these  final postsynaptic chemical events are not yet well understood, it is nevertheless clear  that NMDA receptors provide a physiological basis for the Hebb (1949) synapse.  The model of long-term episodic memory to be developed here is based on the circuitry  of the CA3 region of the hippocampus. The circuitry of this area is shown in the beautiful  anatomical drawings of Cajal (1911) reproduced in Fig. 14.4A and schematically in  Fig. 14.4B. In addition to receiving synapses from external axons originating in other  parts of the brain, CA3 hippocampal neurons have extensive recurrent axon collaterals  that synapse onto many of the neighboring CA3 neurons. These recurrent synapses  shown by open arrowheads in Fig. 14.4B, contact the apical dendrites of CA3 pyramidal  cells. These recurrent synapses in CA3 will be assumed to be modifiable according to a  Hebb rule. In addition to this recurrent excitation, all of the hippocampal output axons in  the model also contact an inhibitory interneuron that provides recurrent subtractive  inhibition to all of the hippocampal pyramidal cells (neuron G in the diagram). Marr  (1971) was one of the first to propose a hippocampal model involving both recurrent  excitation via Hebb synapses and inhibition.  During pattern learning, external axon inputs cause some model CA3 pyramidal cells  to become active, and the Hebb synapses between each pair of active neurons are then  modified. For simplicity in the current implementation, the Hebb Rule was used in the  form:  wij = kH(R, - 0.5M)H(R, - 0.5M)  where  H(x) = {lQ * > °  (.4.26)  In this expression M is the maximum firing rate of the neurons (100 spikes/s in the  simulation). Thus the Hebb synapses in the model are strengthened only when both  presynaptic and postsynaptic neurons are firing at greater than half their maximum rates.  Furthermore, the synapse changes to a fixed value k when modified. The version of the  238  Spikes, decisions, and actions  External Inputs  ^ Recurrent  Collaterals  External  Input Axons  B  Hippocampal  Output Axons  Fig. 14.4 Recurrent CA3 hippocampal network. The anatomical diagram in A is from Cajal (1911), while the  schematic in B depicts the connectivity of the neural model in (14.27). Recurrent collaterals contact other  pyramidal cells with Hebbian synapses (open arrowheads), and all pyramids generate inhibitory feedback via  the G interneuron. For clarity, only a subset of connections is shown.  Hebb Rule in (14.26) thus imposes both a threshold for modification and a saturation on  the strength of each synapse, and it requires concurrent presynaptic and postsynaptic  activity for modification to occur. This form of Hebb Rule was first employed in the  associative memory model of Willshaw et al. (1969). Once modified by learning, a Hebb  synapse in the model is assumed to remain in its strengthened state for the duration of the  simulation. As pairs of neurons are reciprocally interconnected, (14.26) implies that the  synaptic connections will be modified identically: it',, = w„. This symmetry of Hebbian  modified connections has been assumed by both Hopfield (1982, 1984) and Cohen and  Grossberg (1983), and it will be adopted here.  The CA3 network simulated here incorporates 256 pyramidal cells in a 16 x 16 array  plus one interneuron providing feedback inhibition. Each of the 256 pyramidal cells  provides recurrent Hebb synapses onto apical dendrites of the other 255 pyramids but not  Lyapunov functions and memory  239  onto itself. Thus, each CA3 pyramid has one synapse from an external axon, 255 mod- ifiable Hebb synapses from the other CA3 pyramids, and one inhibitory synapse from the  interneuron. Using spike rate descriptions of the neurons, the dynamical equations for the  network are:  dR,  „  1 0 0 ( £ ^ «•„/?,-0.1G);  \0—L=-Ri  +  dt  ""' ' a2 + (T,2-, wijRj - 0.1G)2,  dG  ^ 