on the threshold quite accurately (for L= 100 the threshold is between 3.0 and 3.5).  Threshold values thus obtained are plotted as a solid curve in Fig. 7.8. The comparison  data, again from Finkelstein et al. (1990), were obtained by first letting the retina adapt  to a uniform background of intensity L and then flashing the incremental test stimulus,  just as in the simulation of (7.13). As shown by the double-headed arrow at L = 400. light  adaptation improves thresholds here by about 40 times. Furthermore, light adaptation  increases the intensity range over which discrimination is possible from about L = 400  (no adaptation) to about F = 40 000 (adapted state). Thus, retinal light adaptation greatly  extends the range over which effective visual discrimination is possible.  One consequence of retinal light adaptation is the production of retinal afterimages.  Afterimages occur when adjacent patches of retina are adapted to different light inten- sities. To experience a retinal afterimage, fixate the cross on the white and black bar  Computation by excitatory and inhibitory networks  103  Fig. 7.9 Fixation of the cross on the left for about 15 s followed by a shift of gaze to the right cross will  produce a negative retinal afterimage of the bars against the gray background.  pattern in Fig. 7.9 for about 15 s, then switch your gaze to the cross in the uniform gray  field. You will perceive a set of low contrast bars with a darker bar located behind the  cross (the bars will shift back and forth a bit due to small eye movements on your part). As  a dark bar underlies the cross, this is a negative afterimage: light adaptation in your retina  has caused it to signal that uniform gray areas are darker following adaptation to white  but lighter following adaptation to black bars.  The MatLab script Retina.m can also be used to simulate this phenomenon. Suppose  that the white bars in Fig. 7.9 have an intensity of 2000, the black bars an intensity of 1,  and the gray field an average intensity of 1000. Running Retina.m with L = 1 and A = 999  reveals that patches of retina adapted to dark bars will produce a steady state ganglion cell  firing level G = 22.2 when subsequently stimulated by the gray pattern. To simulate the  afterimage to white bars, run the program with L = 2000 and A = -1000. The response to  gray is now L= 18.0, so the uniform gray pattern will appear darker where the retina had  adapted to light bars. Thus, the formation of negative afterimages can be explained by the  dynamics of retinal light adaptation. The slow time course of afterimage decay is a further  phenomenon explained by the dynamics of (7.13). Experimental measurements have  revealed that negative afterimages decay exponentially with a time constant of 3-5 s  (Burbeck, 1986; Kelly and Martinez-Uriegas, 1993). In (7.13) only the time constant for  neuromodulation by the interplexiform cell P is sufficiently long to account for this. Thus,  the slow build-up and decay of retinal neuromodulation results in the slow decay of  negative afterimages. Other aspects of afterimage formation can also be explained by this  mechanism (Wilson, 1997).  7.4 Wilson-Cowan cortical dynamics  Networks in the cortex can produce much more varied and complex dynamics than those  exhibited by the retina. Indeed, cortical circuitry is sufficiently complex that we are  nowhere close to understanding it in any detail. In consequence, it has been fruitful to  analyze simplified models of cortical circuitry and dynamics. It has been known for at  104  Spikes, decisions, and actions  least half a century that cortical neurons may be subdivided into two classes: excitatory  (E) neurons which are usually pyramidal cells providing cortical output, and inhibitory (I)  interneurons with axons that generally remain within a given cortical area. Furthermore,  anatomical evidence (Sholl, 1956; Szentagothai, 1967; Colonnier, 1968; Scheibel and  Scheibel, 1970; Douglas and Martin, 1998) suggests that all forms of interconnection  among these cell types regularly occur: E —> E, E —> I, I —• E, and I —* I. Given evidence for  these common aspects of cortical architecture, we proposed that cortical dynamics might  profitably be studied through analysis of the simple basic network illustrated in Fig. 7.10 