developed a neural model to predict these wave phenomena. Short-range excitatory  interconnections among amacrine cells cause waves to propagate across the tissue. The  role of inhibition is played by neural adaptation or a refractory period in the amacrine  cells following bursting. Finally, the amacrine activity is spatially pooled to produce  ganglion cell outputs to the LGN. Whereas the Wilson-Cowan (1973) equations generate  waves via recurrent excitation and delayed inhibition, the Feller et al. (1997) model  employs only one cell type with recurrent excitation but with a delayed refractory period  following activity. Thus, common dynamical principles (but differing physiological  realizations) underlie these two examples of neural traveling waves. More complex  methods for producing neural traveling waves are discussed in Chapters 12 and 13.  As virtually all areas of the brain incorporate both excitation and inhibition, the  Wilson-Cowan (1972. 1973) equations may be regarded as a canonical model of a wide  range of complex dynamics emerging from such interactions. Indeed. Hoppensteadt and  Izhikevich (1997) provide a current and extensive catalog of Wilson-Cowan dynamics.  Furthermore, the Wilson-Cowan equations have recently provided explanations for  psychophysical data (Adtni et al., 1997), EEG waveforms during epileptic seizures  (DcBcllis et al., 1998). and other aspects of neural dynamics (Jirsa and Haken. 1997).  7.5  Visual hallucinations  A variety of drugs can induce hallucinations involving stereotypical geometric patterns:  concentric circles, radial spokes, spirals, or checkerboards with expanding check sizes  Computation by excitatory and inhibitory networks  113  away from central vision (Siegel, 1977). An elegant study by Ermentrout and Cowan  (1979) demonstrated that these geometric hallucinations can be predicted from spatially  inhomogeneous steady states of (7.22) if the equations are extended to two spatial  dimensions by making each summation a function of both x and y. In addition to  extending (7.22) to two dimensions, two additional factors were found to be necessary to  explain visual hallucinations. First, the visual cortex must become sufficiently excitable  so that spatially inhomogeneous steady states like the one-dimensional example in  Fig. 7.12 become asymptotically stable. (Such states are appropriate for short-term  memory but not for normal visual cortex.) In drug-induced hallucinations, the drugs  presumably potentiate the E —» E connections in visual cortex, thus producing hyper- excitability.  The second explanatory factor in hallucinations is the mapping from retina to visual  cortex. For reasons discussed elsewhere (Wilson et al., 1990), there is an enormous  magnification of the central retinal representation in cortex relative to that of peripheral  retina. Furthermore, the left and right halves of the retinas are each separately mapped  onto the opposite visual cortex. Thus, the map of the right half of each retina onto the left  visual cortex in humans is distorted approximately as shown in Fig. 7.16, where the  vertical meridian maps onto the boundary of the cortical representation (Horton and  Hoyt, 1991). As observed by Schwartz (1980) and Fischer (1973), the polar coordinate  representation of the retina (/?, 0) is mapped approximately into cortical coordinates ln(  l+R) and 0, the transformation used to produce the maps in Fig. 7.16. This retino-cortical  mapping transforms images falling on the retina in highly characteristic ways. As shown  in Fig. 7.16, concentric circles A-D on the retina would be mapped into the (almost)  parallel vertical lines A-D in the cortical representation. Likewise, the radial spoke  pattern E-G maps into (almost) parallel horizontal lines E-G on the cortex. Finally,  spirals on the retina will map into oblique, parallel cortical lines.  The important insight of Ermentrout and Cowan (1979) was that asymptotically stable  steady states of the cortex where neural activity is organized into roughly parallel stripes  would of necessity be perceived by the subject as patterns of concentric circles, radial  spokes, or spirals depending on what retinal stimulus would have produced them nor- mally. The final point in explaining hallucinations was to prove that such parallel stripes  of cortical activity do indeed represent asymptotically stable steady states in a two- dimensional generalization of (7.22). We have already seen that periodic activity patterns  can be asymptotically stable in the simulation reproduced in Fig. 7.12, and the analytical 