rods. This is actually a third order differential equation (see Chapter 3), but it is so simple  18  Spikes, decisions, and actions  that we can solve it exactly using Theorem 1. We already know the solution to the first  equation, which we can then substitute into the second equation:  x(t)=e-'/T  so  dt  T  (2.7)  The equation for y is now just a more general case of our last example, and we can again  solve using Theorem 1 to get:  ytt) = k- e"'/r  (2.8)  Substituting this expression for v in the final equation in (2.6) and again using Theorem 1  gives our final result:  k2 (  t\2  m = T l - i e  •l/r  (2.9)  Thus our three-equation cascade in eqn (2.6) produces a response proportional to ?2  for small ?. In comparing data with eqn (2.9) it is usually convenient to plot the data on  double logarithmic coordinates, because these coordinates transform the rising phase of  the response into a straight line with a slope of 2.0. Figure 2.3 illustrates such a plot of  human rod electroretinogram (ERG) data (Hood and Birch, personal communication).  1 00r  >  c  s  o  CL  1 c- 3- Slope = 2  I  1  1  I  1 o  Time (ms)  - i  1 — i — i  I I I I  100  Fig. 2.3 Double logarithmic plot of human rod ERG data (from Hood and Birch, 1990). As shown by the  solid line, the initial phase of the response has a slope of 2.0 in agreement with eqn (2.9).  First order linear systems  19  As shown by the solid line, the rod ERG response has an initial slope of 2.0, so there are  three stages in the rod biochemical response to light as described in (2.6) and solved in  (2.9). This shows that a neuroscientist can sometimes infer aspects of the underlying  biochemistry or circuitry from a theoretical analysis of the measured response.  We can generalize our treatment of cascades to N stages, each with time constant r and  amplification A: to yield:  j.N-1  / , \ A?-1  (N~- 1)! VT  = A ' ( 0 = 7 T 7 - T T T ( 1 )  Z~"T  (2-10)  where zs{t) is the response of the Mh stage of the reaction cascade. Note that we can allow  different values of the amplification k so long as r remains constant for all stages.  2.3 Responses of a simple model neuron  Let us now see how (2.3) can be modified to describe the response of a simple neuron to an  external stimulus. This neuron will be represented by its spike rate as a function of time  without describing the shape and timing of each individual spike. Before diving into the  mathematics, however, a brief discussion of neural responses as a function of stimulus  intensity is in order.  The particular physiological example I shall choose is from the visual system, but  similar functional relationships with slightly different parameter values are common in  the nervous system. Sclar, Maunsell, and Lennie (1990) measured the spike rate of visual  neurons in response to stimuli of varying contrast or intensity. Recordings from several  different levels of the visual system (lateral geniculate, striate cortex, middle temporal  cortex) showed that all neurons could be described by a single equation in which only the  parameters differed among visual areas. Albrecht and Hamilton (1982) have also found  that this same equation provided a better fit to their data than several other candidate  equations. The equation is known as the Naka-Rushton (1966) function in vision  research and as the Michelis-Menton equation in chemical kinetics. This equation relates  a stimulus intensity P, which may be thought of as the net postsynaptic potential reaching  the site of spike generation, to response or spike rate S(P) as follows:  (  MPN  1  "  f o r P > 0  S(P)= < oN + PN  (2.11)  I 0  for P < 0  In this equation M is the maximum spike rate for very intense stimuli, and a determines 