simply the set of all points on all trajectories that approach the equilibrium point at Ay  asymptotically. Earlier examples, such as short-term memory networks, have shown that  many nonlinear systems have more than one asymptotically stable equilibrium point, so  the domain of attraction of any given equilibrium is generally only a portion of the state  space. Otherwise stated, a nonlinear dynamical system can have many valleys sur- rounding different equilibrium states with ridges of mountains separating them.  Let us assume that we have found a Lyapunov function U for an equilibrium point of a  dynamical system at XQ. By definition a Lyapunov function must satisfy Theorem 12,  Therorem 13: Let U'x) be a Lyapunov function in a region R surrounding an  equilibrium point at XQ. Then there is a range of constants o• > 0 defining the  regions U(x) < a with the properties:  (a) (7(A) < a is a region enclosing XQ but no other singularities; and  (b) U(x) < a lies entirely within R.  Then K = max(a) defines a region DA bounded by (7(A) = A' within which all  trajectories approach x0 asymptotically.  228  Spikes, decisions, and actions  >  o  Fig. 14.1 Circular contours of U\ in (14.4), a Lyapunov function for (14.3). One trajectory of (14.3) is shown  by the heavier line and arrow.  so U will delimit a region R within which the conditions of the theorem hold.  From this information one can prove that a constraint U < K defines a subregion DA  contained within the domain of asymptotic stability of An.  The key concept implied by this theorem is that of a closed contour in two dimensions, or  a spheroidal surface in higher dimensions, that encloses the equilibrium point. So long as  the region within this contour lies entirely within R, Theorem 12 guarantees that all  trajectories within the region will decay asymptotically to the equilibrium point.  Regarding f7 as defining a topographic valley with equilibrium at the bottom, the con- stant K in Theorem 13 is the highest point on the valley walls from which nothing can flow  out of the valley. Although you might guess that DA would encompass the domain of  attraction, this is generally not true. This is because DA depends not only on the dyna- mical equations of the system but also on the choice of Lyapunov function, which is not  unique, as the following example will show. Thus DA will usually define only a subregion  of the total domain of attraction of a given equilibrium.  The feedback dynamics in eqn (14.3) have already been analyzed using the Lyapunov  function U\ from (14.4). From the evaluation of dt'i/d? in (14.6), it was shown that U] is a  Lyapunov function within the entire (A, T) phase plane. Contours defined by U\ = a are  simply circles surrounding the origin, as shown in Fig. 14.1. Fherefore, the domain of  attraction of the singularity tit the origin is the entire phase plane: all trajectories arising  from all possible initial conditions approach the origin asymptotically. One such tra- jectory is shown moving downhill across the contours of constant U\ by the heavy line in  Fig. 14.1.  Estimation of the domain of attraction for (14.3) using U2 from (14.4) gives a much  different result. U2 itself is only positive definite in the strip Jvj < 1. Fhe derivative of U2 is:  dc7:  ~d7  - 6 A V  4v4 - 4.xy3  ; 14.10)  Lyapunov functions and memory  229  Fhis function is clearly negative definite very near the origin, where the two quadratic  terms dominate, and so it is a second Lyapunov function for (14.3). However dU2/dt > 0  for all points x = 0, |vj > 1/V-- Without further ado, it is apparent that the domain  within which U2 is a Lyapunov function must be restricted to some closed contour of U for  which | r| < 1/^/2.  This example leads to two conclusions. First, Lyapunov functions for any particular  dynamical system are not unique. Indeed, there will frequently be an infinite number of  Lyapunov functions for any given singularity. For example, the Lyapunov function U2 in  (14.4) can be generalized to: 