To complete the solution of (15.5), 0 from (15.21) is substituted into the dG/dt equation  in (15.18), which can now be easily solved for G(t):  G ( ? ) = e ^ e x p ( - - ^ )  (15.23)  The separation of variables assumption (15.14) indicates that the solution to the cable  equation (15.5) is V(x,t) = G(t)H(x), so:  ,  ,  ,,T *^  /-4TT2n2D2l\  (2irnx\  F(.Y,?)=e-'^]T/.» e xP  n  cos - —  (15.24)  H=i  Summation over n has been included here, because each GH product for a given value of  /; independently solves (15.5). Hence, a sum of such products is also a solution. The  astute reader may have observed that sine terms are also part of the general solution in  Diffusion and dendrites  259  (15.20) and (15.22), and this is correct. Appropriate sine terms would then also be added  into the general solution in (15.24) (see Exercise 2).  The initial conditions on a cable equation solution specify a distribution  V(x,0) = //(A). The greatest achievement of Fourier was to prove that the values A„ can  be chosen to fit any initial distribution H(x) that is physiologically possible. The repre- sentation of a function as a sum of cosines and sines is accordingly termed a Fourier series  representation. Development of the mathematics of Fourier series is outside the scope of  this book, but excellent treatments are available elsewhere (e.g. Gaskill, 1978).  Examination of the solution to the cable equation in (15.24) reveals that the high spatial  frequencies defined by large values of n decay much more rapidly than the lower fre- quencies, because the constant in the time exponential is proportional to if. This can be  seen in the MatLab animation Diffusion.m, which starts with an initial distribution that is  the sum of cosine frequencies /; = 1 and n = 5 in (15.24). Consistent with the time  dependence of (15.24), the frequency n = 5 variation in the initial distribution dies out  much faster than the lower frequency;; = 1 variation. In running the script, you may also  notice that the overall level of V declines with time, which is a consequence of the term  e~'lT that multiplies the entire solution. Reference back to the derivation of (15.5) and the  solution by separation of variables shows that this term results from leakage of the dif- fusing ion through the membrane. In the case of a dendrite, V will ultimately decay back to  the resting potential of the neuron.  15.4 Passive dendritic potentials  Dendrites are often sufficiently long relative to the length constant D so that they can be  treated as infinite for the purposes of mathematical analysis. This leads to consideration  of solutions to the cable equation (15.5) for the case where the boundary conditions are  F(±oo, ?) = 0. This assumes that the potential V represents the deviation of the dendritic  potential from the resting potential. Furthermore, we are assuming that locations where  postsynaptic events cause local changes in V are sufficiently far from the ends of the  dendrite that conditions at the ends make little contribution to the solution. If the den- dritic geometry is such that equation (15.13) is satisfied (see Fig. 15.3), we may follow Rail  (1962, 1989) and treat the entire dendritic tree as a single long cylinder.  In order to solve the cable equation for an equivalent cylinder model of a dendritic tree,  it is necessary to consider how postsynaptic potentials diffuse away from a synapse.  Suppose, therefore, that there is a synapse located at A = 0 which is briefly active at ? = 0  resulting in the local postsynaptic potential being elevated to F0. If the dendrite is infi- nitely long in both directions, the solution can be obtained from (15.24) in the limit as the  dendritic length L —» oo. In doing this, it is appropriate to define a new frequency variable  w = n/L, so u> becomes a continuous variable as L —> oc. In this limit the summation in  (15.24) becomes an integral and the solution is:  /•oo  V(x, t) = e~'/T / 