conductance change must be very fast. This is why a short synaptic time constant  Tsyn = 1 ms was used in the program IPSPinteractions.m to produce antiphase locking,  while rsyn = 2 ms produced the inhibitory synchrony in Fig. 12.4.  For excitatory interconnections k > 0 in the phase oscillator model, and this results in a  reversal of the inequality in (12.25) for synchronization. Thus, only brief EPSPs will  produce synchrony, while longer ones will cause phase locking at 0 = IT. From their  analysis plus modeling studies, Van Vreeswijk et ai (19^4) conclude: Tf the rise time of the  synapse is longer than the duration of an action potential, inhibition not excitation leads  to synchronized firing.' (p. 313). As this is generally the case in the nervous system,  inhibition appears to be the most common mechanism of synchronization. Recently,  Ringel et al. (1998) have shown that inhibitory networks can also generate propagating  waves of neural activity under certain conditions.  The qualitative reason that slow IPSPs lead to synchronization of mutually inhibitory  neurons is roughly the following. After each neuron fires, it generates a slow rising but  prolonged IPSP that prevents the other neuron from firing. The only stable solution is  then for the two neurons to fire synchronously, thereby avoiding one another's slowly  rising IPSPs. This theme is illustrated at the top of Fig. 12.5, where spikes (black vertical  bars) generate the IPSPs in their inhibitory partners as shown by the arrows. When the  IPSPs are very fast, however, each neuron prevents the other from firing at the same time,  so anti-phase locking is the only possible solution. An analogous explanation, depicted at  the bottom of Fig. 12.5, shows why slow EPSPs produce out-of-phase locking: each  neuron of the pair will be stimulated to fire at the peak of the EPSP received from its  neighbor.  12.5 Thalamic synchronization  Fhe thalamus, which contains cell groups that relay information from sense organs to the  cortex, becomes capable of generating synchronized bursts of activity during deep sleep  Synapses and synchrony  199  Inhibition  Excitation  Time (ms)  Fig. 12.5 Schematic explanation of inhibitory synchronization (above) and excitatory antiphase locking  (below) between pairs of neurons. Vertical bars represent spikes that produce the gray IPSPs (above) or  EPSPs (below) indicated by arrows.  and also during certain epileptic seizures known as absence seizures. In the LGN (lateral  geniculate nucleus), which receives input from the retina and relays it to visual cortex,  these synchronized oscillations are the result of interactions between the LGN relay cells  and cells in the PGN (peri-geniculate nucleus) (Crunelli and Leresche, 1991;Steriadee?a/.,  1993; Kim et ai, 1995, 1997). As shown by the circuit diagram in Fig. 12.6, axon col- laterals of the relay cells (E) excite neurons in the PGN, and these PGN neurons (I) in turn  provide feedback inhibition onto the relay cells. This is a network with feedback inhibi- tion between adjacent relay cells, so one might intuitively feel that synchronized oscilla- tions should be impossible. However, several different factors that we have already  analyzed combine to produce stable oscillations and thalamic synchrony during deep  sleep (when there is no retinal input).  A dynamical characteristic of the individual neurons in Fig. 12.6 provides the first key  to network behavior. During deep sleep the membrane properties are altered (presumably  by modulatory neurotransmitters) so that the individual neurons produce a burst of  spikes as a result of postinhibitory rebound (PIR). As these bursts of spikes are triggered  by /T currents, let us adapt the bursting neuron in (10.3) to simulate LGN and PGN cells  during sleep. The only change necessary is to reduce the magnitude of the change in Ca2+  conductance in the dX/dt equation. Thus, all other equations in (10.3) remain the same,  except that the dX/dt equation is changed to:  dLV  d? :  30 ( -X+6.65(F+0.86)(F + 0.84))  12.26)  the only change being a reduction of one parameter to 6.65. This makes the equilibrium  point of the system asymptotically stable so that the model neuron is no longer an  200 