occurs. Also find a time and pulse strength at which a hyperpolarizing pulse (i.e. a pulse of  negative amplitude) will terminate the spike train. Fo plot the unstable limit cycle in the  phase plane, modify the script to make time run backwards by making the two time  constants (Tau and TauR) negative. This will make the unstable limit cycle asymptot- ically stable. Also change the initial conditions so R(0) = 0.25, which falls within the  domain of attraction of this limit cycle.  6. You might have noticed that eqn (9.3) has a factor of (1 - R) in the Na+ current to  represent channel inactivation. Equation (9.7), however, does not contain this term, so it  strictly represents a neuron in which Na* currents never inactivate. The following  equations describe a neuron containing the (1 - R) term:  0.8 — = -(31.6 + 85.3 V+ 58.0 F:)(l - R)( V - 0.55) - \0R(V + 0.92) + I  ™ = ±-(-R + 2.2V+U5)  Action potentials and limit cycles  155  Give a complete analysis of these equations, including the resting state and all bifurcations  produced by varying /. Be sure to indicate the nature of each bifurcation. Simulate the  equations for several appropriate values of / and use this to sketch the bifurcation dia- gram for the system.  7. Give a complete analysis of the Morris-Lecar (1981) equations in (9.11). First deter- mine the effects of voltage dependence of rR using Morris_Lecar.m. In particular, com- pare spikes with the voltage dependence in (9.1 1) with those produced when TR = 0.5, i.e.  constant. Use / = 0.09 as the stimulating current. For the remaining analysis set TR =0.5  for simplicity. Find and analyze the stability of all steady states for / = 0 (this will require  the MatLab function fzero, see Appendix). What is the threshold value of/, and what type  of bifurcation occurs at threshold?  8. Just as the Morris-Lecar equations in (9.11) have been normalized, so (9.10) describing  a neocortical neuron can also be simplified to reveal its canonical (i.e. essential) dynamical  structure. Consider the following equations, which obey Ohm's law with normalized  equilibrium potentials of 1.0 for Na+ and —1/5 for K+:  (V-l)-R\V  +  j\+I  These equations have been implemented in the script CanonicalNeuron.m. Give a com- plete dynamical analysis of these equations, finding all steady states and their stability  when / = 0. Determine the value of / at the threshold for spike generation, and indicate  the type of bifurcation that occurs at threshold. Now reduce the time constant of the R  equation from 5 to 1.4. What happens if the equations are simulated with 1=0 (i.e. no  external input) and initial conditions V = 0.4, R = 0.3? Why?  dV  ~di~  J  5  - 4 V2 - \  V  "To  10  Neural adaptation and bursting  We have now explored the nonlinear dynamics of the Hodgkin-Huxley equations and  seen how the balance between rapid depolarizing and slower hyperpolarizing currents  produces limit cycles and action potentials. Furthermore, it has been shown that an  additional current /A, has the effect of greatly increasing the dynamic range of mam- malian neurons by causing firing to begin at a rate of less than 1.0 Hz rather than a rate  close to 200 Hz characteristic of Hodgkin-Huxley neurons. These two modes of spike  initiation result from different underlying dynamics characterizing the bifurcations  leading to repetitive firing: hard Hopf bifurcations in the case of Hodgkin-Huxley or  Class II neurons, and a saddle-node bifurcation in the case of mammalian or Class I  neurons. These are only the basics of single neuron dynamics, however, as many other  currents have been identified in neurons from a wide range of species. Mammalian and  human neocortical neurons, for example, are currently known to incorporate at least 12  ion currents, each of which has a somewhat different effect on action potential production  (Gutnickand Crill, 1995). The detailed biophysics of these currents will not be developed 