adaptation, and they can exhibit very different behaviors under different conditions of  stimulation. The equations are:  dF  ,  ,  = - F 3 + 3 V2 + R-Z  + I  dt  dR  ~d7  dr  d?  -R+ 1 - 5F:  0.015(-- + 4(K+1.6))  where V, R, and z are respectively the voltage, the recovery variable, and the adaptation  variable. Characterize the responses of this neuron model for three different levels of input  current: (a) /=2.0; (b) 1=2.5; and (c) 7=3.0. You will need to combine Runge-Kutta  simulations with all tests for chaos, etc. In your simulations, use a time increment  A? = 0.04, and initial conditions V = —1; R = —1; z = 2.0 (these conditions will mini- mize some otherwise tedious transient effects). For each simulation show a plot of 300 ms  of the spike train, and plots of the power spectrum and first return map. For the first  return map you should use as long a simulation as your computer memory will permit in  order to obtain between 200 and 500 return values. Determine the Lyapunov exponents,  and indicate what type of dynamical behavior each value of/produces.  12  Synapses and synchrony  We have investigated the dynamics behind a range of neurons from the squid axon to  bursting cells in neocortex. Fhis provides the basis for studying interactions between  neurons that are synaptically interconnected. This chapter will explore the simplest such  interactions, namely those between pairs of identical neurons connected by either exci- tatory or inhibitory synapses. It might be thought that few really novel results would  emerge from such simple two-neuron systems, but there are surprises in store. For  example, swimming behavior in the mollusk Clione is controlled by mutually inhibitory  neurons that produce a prolonged swimming cycle in the absence of any excitatory drive!  It will also be seen that thalamic bursting during slow wave sleep is synchronized by  mutual inhibition rather than by excitation.  In order to gain insight into the dynamical reasons for these phenomena, we shall first  study a powerful mathematical simplification of interactions between a pair of neurons.  This is the phase oscillator concept introduced by Cohen et al. (1982). Once the abstract  phase oscillator concept has been developed, it will be shown to predict the behavior of  coupled Hodgkin-Huxley neurons. An added benefit is the simulation and analysis of the  neural swimming system of the mollusk Clione. The phase oscillator model will then be  developed further by incorporating a more accurate description of synaptic interactions.  This leads to the surprising prediction that mutual inhibition is the most effective method  of synchronizing neurons. Finally, inhibitory coupling responsible for synchronizing  bursting thalamic neurons during deep sleep will be analyzed.  12.1 Phase oscillator model  Many types of neurons generate an ongoing spike train or sequence of spike bursts  in response to a constant stimulus. From a dynamical perspective, this means that  such neurons generate a limit cycle oscillation in response to constant stimulation. If  two such neurons are reciprocally coupled by excitatory or inhibitory synapses, we  are confronted with the problem of interacting nonlinear oscillators. Although such  coupled oscillators are extremely difficult to analyze with full generality, an elegant  simplification with significant predictive power was discovered by Cohen et al. (1982).  The key insight of Cohen et al. (1982) (sec also Rand et al., 1988) was that only the phase  of each oscillator need be considered when the coupling between the oscillators is  weak. The reason for this is that the amplitude and waveform of each limit cycle will  be largely unaffected under weak coupling, although phase relations and frequencies  Synapses and synchrony  187  can be changed. These observations are evident in the discussion of phase shifting in  Chapter 9.  To develop the concept of a phase oscillator, let us consider two coupled oscillators,  an abstraction of two interacting neurons. Each oscillator will be described by a single  differential equation governing the rate of change of its phase 8 with time. For a single  oscillator with no coupling, the equation is:  — = u> so 0(0 = w?(mod 27r)  (12.1)  where w is the frequency of the limit cycle oscillation. The solution of this equation is  modulo 27r because the phase is periodic over that range. Suppose now that two such  oscillators are coupled together using the synaptic coupling H:  d0, 