13.2A). In Clione, mutual inhibition represents the only synaptic interaction between  component neurons. A major role of this inhibition is to force neurons controlling  antagonistic muscles to fire in antiphase, as was apparent from decoupling the half- centers of the lamprey model.  Finally, central pattern generators generally incorporate some form of recurrent exci- tation within each half-center. This is the case for the E neurons on either side of the  lamprey segmental oscillator, and it is also exemplified by the DSI-DSI and VSI-VSI  excitation in Tritonia. Clione might seem to be an exception to this rule, as there are no  excitatory synapses in its two-neuron swimming network. However, postinhibitory  rebound acts like a form of seif-excitation following a strongly hyperpolarizing event.  Recurrent excitation is responsible for bursting in both the lamprey and Tritonia swim- ming oscillators, as none of the cells incorporated in these models can burst due to intrinsic  membrane currents. Control of excitation mediated burst duration by serotonin enables  the lamprey to control its swimming speed. Such neuromodulation of central pattern  generators turns out to be another common motor control theme (Stein et ai, 1997).  In closing this chapter, an important principle of neural modeling deserves emphasis.  Three different central pattern generators have been modeled and analyzed here: Clione,  Swimming and traveling waves  221  lamprey, and Tritonia. The modeling itself has been carried out at three different levels of  generality. The Clione and Tritonia models incorporated detailed descriptions of multiple  ion currents and resulted in simulations at the level of individual spikes. The lamprey  segmental oscillator, on the other hand, was simulated at the spike rate level, with only the  /AHp current being explicitly included. Finally, the very general phase oscillator model  used to analyze traveling waves in the lamprey ignores all details of the segmental oscil- lators except that they do in fact oscillate. The deep insight provided by these examples is  that neural network behavior can be elucidated through studies conducted at several  different levels of generalization. For example, the lamprey oscillator has been simulated  both at the individual ion current and spike level (Grillner et ai, 1988; Hellgren et ai,  1992; Wallen et ai, 1992) and at the spike frequency level (Buchanan, 1992; Williams,  1992; Ekeberg, 1993), and the results have been similar, although not identical. In Eke- berg's (1993) simulation of the entire spinal cord and biomechanics of lamprey swimming,  description at the spike frequency level was necessary in order for the problem to remain  conceptually and computationally tractable. Bigger simulations utilizing more complex  descriptions of individual neurons are not necessarily better. Sometimes, the sheer size of  a simulation obscures an understanding of the dynamical and physiological principles  upon which network operation is based. As Kopell (1988, p. 400) phrased it: 'The level of  detail needed to account for a particular phenomenon depends on the phenomenon. In  working with a "realistic", i.e., detailed model, one can lose sight of why it is working, and  whether it would continue to work if some ad hoc part of the description is modified.'  Excellent sources of material on other central pattern generators include the edited  volumes by Selverston (1985), Cohen et al. (1988), and Stein et al. (1997). All are excellent  sources for both deepened understanding of motor control and modeling projects.  13.7 Exercises  1. Determine the constant phase lag 0 and frequency w for backward swimming in (13.6)  by setting ACJI = 0 and solving the resulting equations.  2. As discussed in the chapter, lamprey swimming involves a traveling wave with a  wavelength equal to the body length of the animal. As there are about N = 100 segments,  that means that the constant phase lag between segments must be 0 = ±7r/50. Using this  value, solve (13.6) for the values of Au] and AUJ^ that will produce this wavelength for (a)  forward and (b) backward swimming.  3. Insects have six legs arranged roughly hexagonally, and one of their main gaits during  locomotion involves locking three alternate legs in phase and moving them while the  remaining three legs provide a stable triangular platform to support the body. Based upon  the example of quadruped locomotion in the chapter, develop a phase oscillator model for  insect walking by reducing the six equations to two for the activity of adjacent legs. Assume 