rather they circulate at a constant elevation on the valley walls. Systems with a constant of  motion thus are generalizations of the concept of conservation of energy, while systems  described by Lyapunov functions are ones in which energy is lost through generalized  'frictional' forces.  236  Spikes, decisions, and actions  Before leaving the topic of conservative systems, it should be emphasized that Fheorem  14 is not applicable to all conservative systems. In physics, conservative systems are  generally Hamiltonian systems for which the constant of motion cannot be obtained  using Fheorem 14. Such systems have never found application in biology and will  therefore be passed over here. Mathematical aspects of Hamiltonian systems are covered  in any good text on classical mechanics.  14.5 Long-term memory  The major context in which Lyapunov functions have been applied in neuroscience is in  the study of long-term memory networks. Among those developing memory networks  that are biologically plausible are Kohonen (1989), Hopfield (1982, 1984), and Grossberg  (1987) (see also Cohen and Grossberg, 1983). Back-propagation networks are con- siderably less plausible biologically and will not be examined here, although Elman et ai  (1996) have provided some striking insights into development using them. Readers  interested in the mathematical foundations of back propagation are referred to the  excellent book by Hertz et al. (1991).  Long-term memory is generally divided into two categories frequently referred to as  declarative and procedural. Declarative memory in turn may be subdivided into episodic  and semantic memory. Episodic memory stores information about important events or  episodes in our lives along with aspects of the spatial contexts associated with them. Thus,  many of us still have vivid recollections of our first date with the person we eventually  married including what they wore, where we ate, etc. Such memories must necessarily be  encoded in one trial because of the uniqueness of the events themselves. This may be  contrasted with those procedural memories that can only be acquired with repeated  practice, such as learning how to ski or play the violin.  Different brain areas are involved in the encoding and storage of these different types of  memories. Among the brain areas known to be involved in long-term memory, the  hippocampus plays a central role in declarative or episodic memory (O'Keefe and Nadel,  1978; Squire and Zola-Morgan, 1991). Classic studies have shown that humans with  severe hippocampal damage form no long-term memories after the time of the damage,  although episodic memories from earlier periods of their lives remain intact. The hip- pocampus is thus believed to store and consolidate episodic memories for a period from a  few days to a few weeks before the information is transferred back to higher cortical areas  (eg. inferior temporal cortex in vision) for permanent storage. Thus, hippocampal  damage disrupts any further episodic memory storage but does not destroy memory  information already permanently laid down in the cortex.  In 1949 Donald Hebb proposed that long-term memory storage required the  strengthening of synapses contingent upon concurrent presynaptic and postsynaptic  activity. If neurons i and j fire at rates /?, and /v; during episodic learning, therefore, the  Hebb Rule implies that the weight of the synaptic connection between them would  become:  w,, = kR,Rl  (14.25)  Lyapunov functions and memory  237  Years of research into the physiological basis of Hebb synapses has led to a general  consensus that NMDA receptors are involved in both the hippocampus and cortex. As  summarized by Bliss and Collingridge (1993), NMDA receptors can only be activated if  two events occur within about a 100-200 ms time window. First, the presynaptic neuron  must release the transmitter glutamate as a.result of presynaptic spike activity so that it  can bind to NMDA receptor sites. Second, the postsynaptic cell must be depolarized  sufficiently to remove Mg2+ ions that normally block NMDA receptor channels. Elegant  recent experiments have demonstrated that action potentials triggered at the axon hillock  of hippocampal neurons actually propagate back up the major dendrites as well as along  the axon (Magee and Johnston, 1995, 1997; Johnston et ai, 1996; see Chapter 15). This  postsynaptic dendritic spike activity is currently thought to provide the depolarization  necessary for NMDA receptor activation. Following NMDA receptor activation, further  chemical events within the postsynaptic cell lead to synaptic potentiation that lasts for 