hysteresis in the dendrite obviously cannot affect firing in the soma. In the opposite case  when the coupling conductance is large, such as gc = 1, any differences between Fand V-Q  equilibrate so rapidly that the two compartments effectively become one electrically.  Running Plateau.m with gc = 1 will show that both compartments produce spikes in this  case, and there is no plateau potential. Furthermore, the dendritic phase plane now has  only one steady state. This will be more obvious if the program is run with gc = 0.20.  Coupling with the soma, approximated as being at equilibrium: V = -0.754, causes a  bifurcation at which the plateau and unstable steady states of the dendrite vanish as gc  increases. Thus, only intermediate values of the coupling conductance g c are capable of  producing plateau potentials capable of driving spike generation, so separation of ionic  currents into somatic and dendritic compartments is indeed essential to the dynamics of  plateau-generating motorneurons.  276  Spikes, decisions, and actions  (Hz)  Spike Rate  >  c Potential  Dendrit  140  120  100  80  60  40  20  -0.2  40  20  0  - 2 0  - 4 0  - 6 0  - 8 0  1  1 '  0  B- 1  -0  — 1  1  1  1  1  1  1  i  High,/  /  f Low  /  i  .  i  .  i  .  I  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8  Soma Current  1  1  1  1  r  \  \ \ \ \  > \ \  I . I .  5  0  0.5  Soma Current  '  - - ;  - i  1  - i  •  1  Fig. 15.12 Effects of plateau potential in two-compartment motorneuron model. The top graph shows high  and low spike rates generated between A and B depending on activation of the plateau potential. The bottom  graph shows the hysteresis loop in the dendrite under simulated TTX to block spikes in the soma. Between A  and B two asymptotically stable states exist separated by an unstable state (dashed line)  15.9 How many compartments suffice?  The elegant, two-compartment models of Rinzel and colleagues demonstrate that certain  complex dynamical behaviors require partial electrotomc separation between the soma  and dendrite. One need only define a second voltage variable and couple the compart- ments with conductance gc as in (15.48). So. two compartments are computationally  efficient and sometimes necessary to explain neural dynamics, but are they sufficient? If  not, how many compartments should one use? Compartmental models of single neurons  range in size from two-compartments described by as few as four differential equations up  to at least 400-compartments described by several thousand differential equations.  Intermediate within this range is the CA3 hippocampal pyramidal cell model developed  by Traub et ai (1994) comprising 64 compartments.1 The larger models provide much  more detailed descriptions of single neurons but at a price: many of the parameters are  unknown experimentally and can only be guessed or approximated, and the resulting  The program NEURON by Michael Hincs( I9K9,1993) is freely available and recommended for detailed neural  simulations involving large numbers of compartments.  Diffusion and dendrites  277  system of differential equations is generally intractable analytically. Extremely large  multi-compartment neural simulations are perhaps best viewed as 'virtual neurons' (in the  spirit of'virtual reality') upon which to conduct virtual physiological experiments. On the  other hand, two-compartment models represent a major simplification, but they are  tractable and may capture the essence of neural dynamics. Indeed, Mainen and Sejnowski  (1996) were able to adapt the Pinsky and Rinzel (1994) two-compartment model and show  that the range of neocortical activity patterns could be generated simply by varying the  parameter p (see 15.48). In general, it is a good strategy to use as few compartments as are  necessary for understanding the problem at hand: small numbers for large network  simulations, but larger numbers for detailed studies of one or a few neurons.  15.10 Exercises 