peratures and precipitation is only reasonably accurate for about 4-5 days in advance.  However, monthly means of temperature and precipitation can usually be predicted with  considerable accuracy years in advance. Neuroscientists who believe that it is necessary to  understand in detail all of the ionic currents of every neuron in a network to make pre- dictions should recognize that greater descriptive detail in a chaotic neural system will not  generally lead to greater predictive power.  184  Spikes, decisions, and actions  At the level of animal behavior, it has been noted that many small prey animals flee in  highly erratic, unpredictable paths when chased (Humphries and Driver, 1970). Such  behavior, which enhances the prey's chances of escaping, may well represent an adaptive  utilization of neural chaos in motor control. This idea has been extended even further by  Miller (1997) in an attempt to explain the evolutionary roots of creative intelligence. The  basic notion is that dominant individuals in primate societies can enhance their control  of subordinates by introducing a certain degree of unpredictability into their behavior.  Such 'protean behavior' may have provided a basis for the evolution of creative thinking,  because the rapid generation of many unpredictable alternatives is a necessary  ingredient of creativity. It is therefore plausible that chaotic neural dynamics in some  of the highest cortical areas of the frontal lobes may provide the generative element  behind creativity.  On a more philosophic level, what does neural chaos have to say about our own brains  and thought processes? Although there is little direct evidence yet, it is likely that at least  some of the neurons in our brains are in a chaotic dynamical regime some of the time.  Indeed, there is already evidence for chaos among neurons in monkey cortex (Rapp et ai,  1985), and simulations have suggested that cortical networks with recurrent excitation  and inhibition may exhibit chaos (Van Vreeswijk and Sompolinsky, 1996). This may well  be one source of unpredictability in human behavior. The implications of neural chaos go  deeper than this, however. First, chaos may provide a limitation on each individual's  ability to predict his/her own behavior in detail. Although we know very little about the  neural processes involved in thinking or consciousness, we do know that they involve  neurons that might sometimes operate in chaotic regimes. Even though the brain may be  totally deterministic, therefore, we may sometimes have no idea why we suddenly perform  an unexpected act or make a snap decision! Thus, the old free-will versus determinism  controversy in philosophy may have its resolution in neural chaos: a totally deterministic  brain may nevertheless produce behaviors that are not predictable either by that brain  itself or by any other brain on the planet!  11.5 Exercises  1. Consider the FitzHugh-Nagumo equations (8.8) with the following input current:  /input =0.85 + 0.07 sin(27r?/3.69)  Modify the script FitzHugh.m to simulate the response to this input for as long a duration  as computer memory will permit (chaos testing requires long time series). Test the  resulting spike train for chaos, determining the first return map and the Lyapunov  exponent. (You will have to paste the appropriate dynamical equations into a copy ot  LyapunovExpt.m to do this.)  2. Equations (10.2) for a simple bursting neuron produce erratic spike trains for inputs /  near 0.2. Find a value of/that produces chaos in these equations, plot the first return map,  and determine the Lyapunov exponent. (This will again require pasting the equations into  a copy of LyapunovExpt.m.)  Neural chaos  185  3. The data in Fig. 3.4 show that muscle force is only linear over part of its range. Because  of this, Barenghi and Lakshminarayanan (1992) developed the following nonlinear  muscle model and studied its response to sinusoidal stimulation:  d.v  d 7 ~  d.v  d? ~  y  95  5  j  0.1 v - — x + -xi - — A-5 + A sin(27r0.2?)  16  8  16  Simulate these muscle equations for A=2,A = 8.0, and A = 8.905, for as long a temporal  interval as possible. Plot the return maps and determine the Lyapunov exponents in each  case. Which of these stimulus amplitudes causes chaos? (The authors suggested that the  model might explain irregular muscle tremor.)  4. The following three equations describe the Hindmarsh-Rose neuron model with 