where values of the constants An are determined by solving for the eigenvectors  and by the initial conditions. If a single eigenvalue, say A = u>, occurs k times, then  the solutions associated with this eigenvalue will be of the form:  Ai e"" + A2te" + Azt2e"  + ••• + Aktk-] e""  As in the case of second order systems, roots that occur in complex conjugate or pure  imaginary pairs will introduce sine and cosine terms, and multiple roots generate poly- nomials multiplied by exponentials as in critical damping.  As a first example, consider the three-neuron system illustrated in Fig. 4.1. Each  neuron excites one neuron (arrows) and is in turn inhibited by the other (line with  black circle). If we take the excitatory synaptic strength to be 7, the inhibitory synaptic  strength to be —10, and the self decay rate to be —5, the three coupled linear equations  describing this system would be:  (4.2)  5  7  0  -10  - 5  7  7 \  -10  - 5 /  (Ei  [E2  U s  The eigenvalues of this equation are obtained using the MatLab™ function eig() by  typing the following in the command window: eig([— 5, -10, 7; 7, —5, -10; -10, 7, —5]).  This produces the eigenvalues A= - 8 , -3.5 ± 14.71, so the neural responses E, will all  have the form:  Ei = Ae~*' +fie_35'sin(14.7/) + Ce'35'cos(14.7?)  (4.3)  A, B, and C can be determined by substitution back into (4.2) to solve for the eigenvectors  along with the initial conditions. Even without bothering to determine these constants,  however, we have already discovered that the equilibrium point of this three-neuron  50  Spikes, decisions, and actions  system is an asymptotically stable spiral point. In fact, it will not be necessary to solve for  all the constants in solutions of higher order equations such as (4.3), because we will  almost always be dealing with nonlinear problems where the important information is  contained in the eigenvalues.  4.2  Routh-Hurwitz criterion and oscillations  For large linear dynamical systems, two questions frequently arise: (1) is the equilibrium  point asymptotically stable? (2) Under what conditions will the system produce an  oscillation? For example, if we knew that the neural network in Fig. 4.1 produced  oscillations under physiological conditions, we might wish to discover what values of the  excitatory and inhibitory synaptic strengths were required to sustain such behavior. Both  of these questions are answered by the Routh-Hurwitz criterion and related theorems. In  approaching this problem, let us first examine a necessary but not sufficient condition for  asymptotic stability of the steady state at the origin. (Recall that any steady state can be  translated to the origin by subtraction.)  Theorem 5: The stability, asymptotic stability, or instability of the equilibrium  point of (4.1) is determined by the roots of the characteristic equation:  \A-\I\  = o  The equilibrium will be asymptotically stable if all the roots of the characteristic  equation have negative real parts. Writing the characteristic equation as:  XN + aiXN~l + a2X"-2 + ••• + aiV_i A + aN = 0  A necessary (but not sufficient) condition for all roots to have negative real parts is:  ak > 0 for 1 < k < N  This theorem provides a quick check for the possibility of asymptotic stability. Note that  all coefficients must be positive; zero values are excluded. Theorem 5 will not be proved,  because the proof focuses on the mathematical nature of polynomials and has no further  connections with dynamical systems theory.  If the coefficients of the characteristic equation satisfy Theorem 5, the next step is to  apply the much more complex but definitive Routh-Hurwitz test, which I shall state as a  theorem. In order to simplify the notation, let us state the theorem for a fifth order system.  It readily generalizes to any higher order.  Higher dimensional  systems  Theorem 6 (Routh-Hurwitz theorem): Given the coefficients ak of the charac- teristic equation in Theorem 5, compute the following  order N=5:  A, = ai, 