of soma membrane), reduce dendritic ion conductances by a factor of 0.05 as in (15.47),  and stimulate with /=0.2nA. Find a value of the intercompartment conductance g c for  which the dendritic spike always occurs after the soma spike for either dendritic or soma  current injection. Plot your results and compare with Fig. 15.7.  8. Consider the following two-compartment model for a motorneuron:  A'l i + - ]  z + T ^ r C  i  2  dV  1ft ~  dR  ~dl =  dVD  dt  dC  - 4 |  w  ~4(  1 ,  V--3  •R + 3V2)  fi- F D  ~ io  (V  ) «  - 'D  c(rB+L)+£-m(v-v  d7 = 5o'-c + 0"°'  These are based on canonical neocortical neuron equations discussed in the problems of  Chapter 9. First show by simulation (you can adapt CanonicalNeuron.m from Chapter 9)  that these equations exhibit plateau potential behavior for gc = 0.047,p = 0.48 (stimu- late with / = 0.05 for about 50 time units). Next, analyze the phase plane for the second  two equations using the approximation that the soma remains at the resting potential  V = 0. For what range of gc and p values can the dendrite sustain a plateau potential in  this approximation?  16  Nonlinear dynamics and brain  function  We have now completed our exploration of the dynamical foundations of neuroscience.  Perhaps the most striking message to be taken away from this experience is that virtually  all important aspects of neural function are inherently nonlinear. Action potentials and  neural bursting are highly nonlinear limit cycle phenomena that cannot occur in a linear  system. Motor control requires rhythmic oscillations that can be phase locked even in the  presence of noise. This again is only conceivable in terms of limit cycle oscillations. At a  higher cognitive level, categorization, decision making, and long-term memory are all  inherently nonlinear phenomena related to the dynamics of networks with multiple  steady states.  Nonlinear neural networks with multiple steady states unavoidably exhibit bifurca- tions and hysteresis as inputs or parametric variations switch the system between states.  The positive aspect of hysteresis is that once a bifurcation point is passed, neither noise  nor a small reduction in relevant input can immediately switch the system back into the  previous state. At the level of cognitive decisions, hysteresis permits the brain to ignore  modest fluctuations in the evidence available to it. The alternative in complex circum- stances is perseveration and crippling indecision. Unfortunately, hysteresis inherent in  neural decisions and memory can also have deleterious side effects. Depending on the  range over which hysteresis operates, it can lock in judgments and categorizations based  on partial and misleading early data. In short, hysteresis and generalization in neural  networks can unfortunately lead to permanent storage of prejudices and bigotry based on  early experiences with small samples. Such side effects of hysteresis may form one basis  for the persistence of inappropriate social stereotypes.  As implied by the relationship among hysteresis, bifurcation, and prejudice just sug- gested, the conceptual framework provided by nonlinear dynamics has a range of  application that vastly transcends the neural topics to which this book has been devoted.  Surely human interactions, controlled by nonlinear nervous systems, will produce large- scale mirrors of nonlinear phenomena in the sociological realm. Thus, the foundations of  nonlinear dynamics developed here would be expected to have application to a wide range  of other scientific domains. This is manifestly true, and mention of salient examples will  follow shortly. First, however, let us review the basic concepts of nonlinear neuro- dynamics to extract some general principles. This will lead to several guidelines on the  inclusion of nonlinear dynamics in one's own research. Following this is a very brief  survey of links between the nonlinear dynamics relevant to neural problems and dynamical  issues in other fields. Finally, I shall close by posing the ultimate nonlinear dynamical  problem: how can a nonlinear dynamical brain discover nonlinear dynamics?  280  Spikes, decisions, and actions  16.1 Essence of nonlinear neurodynamics  Throughout this book, certain themes in nonlinear dynamics have emerged repeatedly.  To begin, let me remind you of the mathematical basis for our understanding of nonlinear  phenomena. Looking back at the first chapter, two principles were emphasized: the  exponential function and Taylor series. As promised there, the combination of these two 