current to stop bursts. However, bursting can be produced by an inactivating /T current  alone. To examine this, modify the first equation in (10.3) to:  — = -J17.81 +47.58F+33.8F 2)(F-0.48) - 26R(V + 0.95)  d?  L  -2A"(1 -C)(V-  1.4)  The (1 - C) factor here represents full inactivation of the /T current. Simulate this system  by modifying PlantBurster.m appropriately. Next, solve for the equilibrium state,  172  Spikes, decisions, and actions  determine the Jacobian, and prove that the equilibrium is unstable. Finally, simulate the  effects of TTX application by replacing the voltage dependence of the Na+ conductance  in the first bracket above with its evaluation near equilibrium:  {1.065}  Show by simulation that the resulting equations still generate a limit cycle.  6. Addition of/T and /AHP currents to the Morris-Lecar equations (9.11) can also pro- duce a model for cortical bursting. Consider the following equations:  d_F  ~d7  dR  ~dl  dA  "dT^lOV  ' ' 1+exp(-(F + 0.03)/0.01  g(V)  G(V)  -g(V)(V-  1.0) -2R(V+0.7)  -0.5(F+0.5)  -0.1A(F-2.0) - C ( F + 0 . 7 ) + /  0A(-R + G(V))  -X + - 1 +exp(-(K+0.01)/0.075)  1  1 +exp(-(F-0.1)/0.07)  where the time constant in the dR/dt equation has been made independent of V for  simplicity. The A'and C mediated currents here play the same role as in (10.3) or (10.5).  Using the simulation MLburster.m, determine the threshold current / for producing  bursts. Next, simulate the effects of TTX by setting g(V) = 0, and again determine the  threshold for producing an oscillation. What type of bifurcation appears to be involved in  the initiation of bursting based on your simulations? Why?  11  Neural chaos  As we have developed more background in nonlinear dynamics, we have dealt with  increasingly more complex neural systems. In all cases, however, system trajectories have  either approached an asymptotically stable steady state or an asymptotically stable limit  cycle. Nonlinear dynamical systems may, of course, have several steady states and several  limit cycles, which leads to a rich and complex mix of dynamical possibilities. Various  neurophysiological applications of these nonlinear dynamical principles have provided  models of short-term memory, decision making, action potential generation, and  bursting. One might conjecture that we have exhausted the range of dynamical possibil- ities available to the nervous system and that all complex neural phenomena are emergent  properties determined by combinations of these elementary nonlinear phenomena. While  there is no doubt that a large range of brain functions can indeed be understood in terms  of the nonlinear phenomena studied thus far, we have not exhausted the range of sur- prising behaviors that nonlinear dynamics has to offer. In this chapter, deterministic,  nonlinear systems will be shown to exhibit seemingly unpredictable behavior known as  chaos. Neural chaos is a source of important limitations on scientific prediction and even  on our own self-knowledge!  11.1 Defining chaos  To motivate this chapter, it is helpful to recall the Poincare-Bendixon theorem (Theorem  10). In essence, this theorem says that if an annulus can be constructed in a two-dimen- sional system such that all trajectories enter it, yet it contains no steady states, then a limit  cycle must exist within the annulus. Why is this theorem restricted to two-dimensional  systems? Advanced mathematics tells us that the topological generalization of an annulus  to three dimensions is a torus or 'doughnut', and this concept readily generalizes to higher  dimensions. Why cannot the Poincare-Bendixon theorem be extended to higher  dimensions by substituting a region bounded by a torus for the two-dimensional annulus?  The key conceptual reason is that in an autonomous system, trajectories can never  intersect and cross, and this provides a definitive constraint in two dimensions. However,  trajectories in a system with more than two dimensions can pass by without intersecting  in an infinite number of ways. Some of these involve complex periodicities or almost 