R{t) is plotted for P = 40, 80, and 120 in Fig. 2.5, where r = 15 ms. Note that S(P) is  similar to the solid curve in the top panel of Fig. 2.4. Thus, we have solved the equation  for time evolution of the spike rate of a neuron that has the nonlinear stimulus-response  relationship given by S(P) but that nonetheless is governed by linear dynamics. The  nonlinearity in this simple neuron is apparent in Fig. 2.5 from the fact that stimulus  magnitudes differing by 40 produce a progressive compression in the asymptotic response  levels. This example raises the important point that the solution of a differential equation  can be a nonlinear function of its input, as S(P) is indeed a nonlinear function of P, even  1 OOi  1  r  20  40  60  Time (ms)  8 0  1 00  Fig. 2.5 Solution (2.14) to eqn (2.12) for stimulus levels P = 40, 80, and 120.  22  Spikes, decisions, and actions  though the dynamics in (2.12) are linear in the response R(t). When we speak of a  differential equation as being linear, we really mean only that it is linear in the dynamical  variables.  One more important point may be made concerning eqn (2.12). In the case where  S{P(t)) = S, a constant independent of ?, we can solve immediately for the equilibrium  state of the neuron. At equilibrium, there is no variation with time, so dR/dt = 0.  It follows from (2.12) that:  R = S  when — = 0  (2.15)  d?  The equilibrium state is also referred to as an equilibrium point or steady state, and these  terms will be used interchangeably hereafter. The important concept to retain here is that  an equilibrium point is defined mathematically as a state of the system where nothing  changes with time. We shall subsequently see that these points are extremely important to  our understanding of nonlinear neural systems. From the solution to (2.12) in (2.14), we  can see that R(t) approaches equilibrium exponentially as ? —> oc. Therefore, this equi- librium point is asymptotically stable. Equilibrium points and stability will be explored in  detail in the next chapter.  2.4 Excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials  With the background gained thus far, we can now examine the role of ion channels in the  generation of postsynaptic potentials. Ion channels are governed by Ohm's law, which  states that / ~ g(V- E), where /is the ionic current across the nerve membrane, g is the  conductance (reciprocal of the resistance) usually in units of nano-Siemens (nS), and V\s  the voltage difference across the membrane in millivolts (mV). The effective voltage for  any ionic current is the difference between the membrane potential Kand the equilibrium  potential E of the ionic species in question. For any ionic species, the reversal potential is  identical to E, because that is the membrane potential at which the sign of the current /  changes. The equilibrium potential E is determined by the Nernst equation, which  states that:  „  RT.  /C„ N  ( 1 1 6 )  t = — in,  -F  \ C  where z is the charge on the ion in question, and Cout and C,n are the respective con- centrations of the ion outside and inside the cell. R and Fare respectively the thermo- dynamic gas constant and the Faraday constant, and T is the temperature in degrees  Kelvin. At 20°C the ratio RT/F= 25mV. The Nernst equation can be derived from  thermodynamic principles.  Let us consider a simple patch of dendrite that has a passive current due to ionic leakage  through the membrane plus channels for excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic poten- tials (EPSPs and IPSPs). Due to the capacitive properties of the lipid bilayer of the  First order linear systems  23  Presynaptic  (CO Postsynaptic  40 mV  30 msec  •20mV  + 4mV  20 mV  - 8 1 m V  30 ms«c  Fig. 2.6 Postsynaptic responses to a single presynaptic spike for various levels of the postsynaptic resting 