that there is only coupling between adjacent oscillators and that this reciprocal coupling  has strength k. For what values of k will the two sets of three legs oscillate in anti-phase?  4. Consider the equation for a lamprey half-center in (13.2). Assume a stimulus A = 10,  and use (13.3) to determine the parameter values g and TH . Now determine the bifurcation  222  Spikes, decisions, and actions  value for the excitatory connectivity factor (set at 6 in 13.3) for a half-center to generate a  limit cycle. What type of bifurcation does the system go through as the excitatory con- nectivity is increased?  5 . Use the script Tritonia.m to explore the dependence of network bursting on the fol- lowing two parameters: /AHP current strength and rsyn for the DSI-DSI recurrent exci- tatory connections (termed TauED in the script), (a) Keep TauED = 320ms and  determine the number of bursts obtained for the following values of/AHP current mag- nitude: 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, and 1.8. (b) For a current magnitude of 1.6, determine the number of  bursts for each of the following DSI-DSI excitatory synaptic time constants: 400, 320,  300, and 250 ms. Under what conditions does the network appear to generate an  asymptotically stable bursting pattern as opposed to a short transient set of bursts'1 (This  program will take about 5 min per simulation.)  14  Lyapunov functions and memory  All of the nonlinear dynamical problems encountered so far have been analyzed by  linearizing around the equilibrium points of the system to determine stability. While this  is by far the most useful method in practice and one that has enabled us to understand  phenomena as complex as bursting and neural synchrony, it is not the most general  method. Linearized stability analysis of nonlinear systems fails in two important ways.  First, it tells us nothing in cases where the associated linear system has a pair of pure  imaginary eigenvalues (see Theorem 8). In this case higher order nonlinear terms deter- mine the stability. Second, the linearized analysis tells us nothing about the range of initial  conditions for which trajectories will decay to an asymptotically stable steady state. All  that linearized analysis can guarantee is that trajectories starting in a sufficiently small  neighborhood will decay to an asymptotically stable steady state, but no estimate of  neighborhood size is provided.  In a series of deep and elegant theorems published in 1892, the Russian mathematician  Lyapunov solved the problems inherent in linearized stability analysis by developing a  geometric interpretation of the state space trajectories defined by the dynamics. His  results permit us in principle to analyze the stability of any linear or nonlinear dynamical  system whatsoever, and they provide a means for estimation of the neighborhood within  which all trajectories decay to the origin (the 'domain of attraction' see below). Finally,  Lyapunov function theory leads to a generalization of the conservation of energy concept  so important in theoretical physics. As a result, it is sometimes possible to solve for tra- jectories in state space analytically even when the temporal dependence of solutions can  only be determined by simulation. As we shall see, Lyapunov functions make it possible to  analyze neural networks for long-term memory, such as those found in the hippocampus.  An excellent, in-depth treatment of Lyapunov's work may be found in the book by  La Salle and Lefschetz (1961).  14.1 Geometry and evolution of state functions  In order to understand Lyapunov functions, it will first be necessary to develop a number  of geometric concepts associated with the states of a dynamical system. Although these  concepts generalize to any size system, it will help in visualizing them if we restrict  examples to two-dimensional dynamical systems defined by the phase plane variables x  and y. A state function of the system is any scalar function of the system variables  that has continuous partial derivatives throughout the state space. Using U(x,y) as a  224  Spikes, decisions, and actions  two-dimensional example, suppose that:  U = 3x2 + xy + y2  (14.1)  The partial derivatives of U, denoted by OU/dx and dU/dy, are obtained by treating all  variables other than the differential variable as constant while performing the differ- entiation. Thus, the two partial derivatives of U are:  —^ = 6x+v,  and  — = x + 2y  (14.2)  dx  ay 