the axon did not commence spiking until the stimulating current was about halfway to its  maximum value, but once spiking had begun, it continued almost all the way back down  to zero! This is an example of neural hysteresis in a single axon!  This hysteresis experiment can be simulated using (9.7) by varying the input current /as  a triangular function of time. If you run the MatLab program HHWhysteresis.m and  choose a slow ramp and / = 0.2, you will obtain the result plotted in Fig. 9.5, which agrees  well with the data in Fig. 9.4. You should try experimenting with other values of /, which  defines the maximum value of the triangular current variation, to see how it affects the  hysteresis.  Why does eqn (9.7) (or Hodgkin-Huxley) predict hysteresis in the squid axon? Let us  apply the Hopf bifurcation theorem to (9.7) using the Jacobian in (9.9). Because the  characteristic equation will only be quadratic in V, we can easily solve for the value of Fat  which the eigenvalues become pure imaginary, which occurs at V — -0.688. Now this  value of Fmay be substituted into (9.8) to find the current that will produce this steady  state. The result is / = 0.0777, which is thus the value of the current at which a Hopf  bifurcation occurs. Therefore, one might guess that a slightly larger current, such as  / = 0.078, would generate a low amplitude limit cycle in (9.7). If you try this by running  HHWeqn.m, you will indeed see a limit cycle, but it will exhibit the full spike amplitude.  This means that / = 0.0777 is actually a subcritical or hard Hopf bifurcation: (9.7)  must have an unstable limit cycle for / < 0.0777 (refer back to Fig. 8.9). In the real  world, unstable limit cycles can never be observed (due to their instability); only the  144  Spikes, decisions, and actions  50  -50  -100  Unstable  limit cycle  Stable  limit cycle  e, ., „ . . _ . , \ Z > , s  R ' Unstable Spiral  Stable Spiral Point  •//%  °„ . - -  - - *  +'S'  0.05  0 1  0.15  Fig. 9.6  Bifurcation diagram for (9.7) as a function of input current /. Over the range A-B an asymptotically  stable limit cycle (gray region) and an unstable limit cycle (hatched region) coexist. The steady state becomes  unstable at B in a subcritical or hard Hopf bifurcation.  consequences of their presence can be seen. In two-dimensional dynamical systems,  however, we can 'observe' an unstable limit cycle by making time flow backwards (would  that this were also possible in the real world sometimes!). Try running HHWeqn.m by  making both time constants Tau and TauR negative in the script. Change the second  initial condition to X(2, l) = 0.2, and run the program with / = 0.068. You will find that  there is now a small, asymptotically stable limit cycle surrounding the equilibrium point.  Making time run backwards like this switches the stability of all limit cycles in the system,  so the limit cycle that generates spikes is now unstable. (This is why the initial conditions  were altered to be inside this second unstable cycle.) Note that making time run back- wards in simulations does not work in higher dimensional systems, because it reverses the  signs of all eigenvalues.  The situation may be clarified with a bifurcation diagram for (9.7). This is plotted in  Fig. 9.6 where the / range over which both the asymptotically stable (gray) and the  unstable (hatched) limit cycle exist is depicted. When the current /is changed very slowly  from its resting value, the steady state remains asymptotically stable, and spikes will not  be triggered until point B is reached. Beyond B spiking will continue until / finally drops  below point A. Below A the asymptotically stable limit cycle vanishes, and the spike train  stops. Fhis is exactly what is seen in Fig. 9.5 and in the experimental squid axon data in  Fig. 9.4. It was through such a mathematical analysis of the Hodgkin-Huxley equations 