the noise added to the stimulus increases the probability of firing predominantly when the  stimulus sinusoid is near its peak phase. However, the noise alone has a low probability of  generating spikes in the absence of the sinusoidal stimulus: on average it generates 4  spikes/s at random intervals. Fhis example demonstrates that when there is a threshold  for spike generation, subthreshold noise can increase the sensitivity to periodic sensory  stimulation. In this example, the sensory threshold is improved (i.e. decreased) by about  40% through addition of noise. Such noise-induced enhancements of sensitivity are  known as stochastic resonance (see Douglas et al., 1993). Thus, noise can improve sensory  performance via stochastic resonance because of neural thresholds. The price paid for  stochastic resonance is a noisy or stochastic output, but the nature of the stimulus is  encoded into the interspike intervals in the response.  Finally, this simulation provides an explanation for the Poisson character of the ISI  histogram. Referring to Fig. 9.8, assume that the probability of firing a spike during any  one stimulus period is p. That means that the ratio between the first and second peak  amplitude should be about (1 - p), which is the probability of not having fired in the  previous interval. If we let (1 — /J) = 0.3 and take the first peak height as about 60,  Action potentials and limit cycles  147  successive peaks should therefore have heights of 18.0, 5.4, and 1.62. Figure 9.8 shows that  this is about right, although there are too few spikes in this simulation (about a thousand)  to accurately delineate the higher order peaks.  9.5 Human and mammalian cortical neurons  Equation (9.7) provides an accurate and tractable description of the Hodgkin-Huxley  equations for action potentials in the squid axon. However, the squid axon is unusual in  having only one Na+ and one K + current. As a consequence, the squid axon cannot fire at  rates below about 175 spikes/s and produces only a modest increase in spike rate with  increasing input current (see Fig. 9.3). The vast majority of neurons in other animals also  possess a rapid, transient K+ current that permits the cell to fire at very low spike rates  with a long latency to the first spike when the input current is low (Rogawski, 1985). This  current, known as /A, was first characterized and added to the Hodgkin-Huxley model by  Connor, Walter, and McKown (1977). /A currents are found in a wide range of neurons,  including human and mammalian neocortical neurons (Avoli and Williamson, 1996;  Gutnick and Crill, 1995). Because of its ubiquity and also because neurons with an I\  current exhibit a mathematically distinctive bifurcation from the resting to the spike  generation state, let us extend our action potential model to incorporate it.  As with the Na* and K+ currents in the squid axon, Connor et al. (1977) incorporated a  mathematically complex, transcendental description of the I\ current. More recently.  Rose and Hindmarsh (1989) demonstrated that many effects of the /A current could be  approximated by making the equation for the recovery variable R quadratic. Let us  therefore examine the dynamical consequences of a quadratic dR/dt equation. The  equations are:  - - = -{17.81 ±47.58F±33.8F 2}(F-0.48) - 26 R( V + 0.95) +1  ~ = —(-R+  1.29F±0.79±0.33(F±0.38):)  ( 9' 1 0 )  d?  rR  TR = 5.6 ms  The capacitance C = LOuF/cm2 and therefore has not been written explicitly. These  equations have parameter values chosen to provide a good approximation to the action  potentials produced by human neocortical neurons (Wilson, 1999). (Human neurons  have been studied intracellularly in tissue, usually from the temporal lobe, removed  during epilepsy surgery.) Note that the dR/dt equation is written as the sum of a linear and  a quadratic voltage term, which may be interpreted qualitatively as the normal /K and the  transient /A current contributions.  Figure 9.9 shows the state space for (A) / = 0 and (B) / = 0.5 nA from MatLab script  HumanNeuron.m. For / = 0 there are three steady states at a, b and c. The resting state at 