region (gray) that satisfies the conditions of the theorem. To be consistent with Theorem 9,  the annulus must surround a node, spiral point, or center, which is plotted as a dot. Note,  however, that this steady state, although surrounded by the annulus, is not within  the annular region itself, so it does not violate the conditions of the theorem. Arrows in  Fig. 8.3 show representative trajectories entering the annulus over both its inner and outer  boundaries as required by Theorem 10. Once these trajectories enter the annulus, the  conditions of the theorem guarantee that they can never leave. Also, they can never come  to rest, because there are no equilibrium points in the annulus. Finally, because the system  is autonomous, no two entering trajectories can ever cross one another. As trajectories  entering from region A and region B move closer together, therefore, there must be at least  one closed trajectory that they approach asymptotically. Thus, there must be at least one  asymptotically stable limit cycle enclosed within the annulus. This completes an intuitive  proof of the Poincare-Bendixon theorem.  It is important to recognize that Theorem 10 specifies that the annulus must contain at  least one asymptotically stable limit cycle, but the theorem also permits there to be an odd  number of limit cycles. In this case, the outer and inner limit cycles would have to be  asymptotically stable, because trajectories entering the annulus across the outer and inner  Limit  cycle  Fig. 8.3 Annulus (gray region) fulfilling the requirements of Theorem 10. Region A contains a steady state  (unstable), and trajectories enter the annulus from both regions A and B. As indicated, a limit cycle must exist  within the annulus.  120  Spikes, decisions, and actions  Fig. 8.4  Schematic of an annulus (gray region) satisfying Theorem 10 but containing three limit cycles. Two  are asymptotically stable (solid curves), but the intervening one (dashed curve) must be unstable. A is an  unstable node or spiral point. Representative trajectory directions are shown by the arrows.  boundaries must all approach limit cycles (not necessarily the same one). If there is more  than one limit cycle, asymptotically stable limit cycles must alternate with unstable limit  cycles. You can convince yourself of this by imagining what would happen to trajectories  originating between two nested, asymptotically stable limit cycles: they would have to be  separated by an unstable limit cycle, which is illustrated schematically in Fig. 8.4.  Although the existence of alternate asymptotically stable and unstable limit cycles may  seem to be an unlikely occurrence, they are actually predicted by the Hodgkin-Huxley  equations, and their existence has been experimentally verified! Armed with Theorems 9  and 10, we are now ready to study limit cycles in two-dimensional neural systems.  8.2 Wilson-Cowan network oscillator  As a first application of these criteria to neural oscillations, let us consider a localized (i.e.  non-spatial) version of the Wilson- Cowan (1972) equations. The equations presented  here are the simplest example of these equations that possesses a limit cycle. Consider a  four-neuron network consisting of three mutually excitatory E neurons which in turn  stimulate one inhibitory I neuron that provides negative feedback onto the three E cells as  depicted on the left in Fig. 8.5. Neural circuits like this are typical of the cortex, where  inhibitory GABA neurons comprise about 25% of the total population of cortical cells  with the rest being mainly excitatory glutamate neurons (Jones, 1995). Thus, the network  in Fig. 8.5 may be thought of as approximating a local cortical circuit module.  Let us simplify the Wilson-Cowan network by assuming that all E neurons receive  identical stimuli and have identical synaptic strengths. Under these conditions we can  invoke symmetry and set F, = E2 — E3, thereby reducing the number of neurons in the  network, a procedure sometimes termed subsampling (Wallen et al., 1992). This results in  the mathematically equivalent two-neuron network shown on the right in Fig. 8.5. In fact,  we can generalize this argument to any number of mutually excitatory and inhibitory  neurons with identical interconnections, so the key concept is that of recurrent excitation  coupled with recurrent inhibition. Note that by reducing the network to two neurons  (or two neural populations), the recurrent excitation is transformed into equivalent  Nonlinear oscillations  121  Fig. 8.5 Neural circuit of a network oscillator (Wilson and Cowan, 1972). Excitatory connections are shown 