This cubic equation can be solved using the MatLab roots function for any given light level  L. As a useful analytical approximation, however, let us consider two limiting cases, L  very small and L very large. In the former case the 5 term will predominate, so 5 w 10F,  and the network produces no stimulus attenuation. When i > 1, the 5 3 term will be  largest, so 5 « L1''3. Thus, the network will produce dramatic stimulus compression in  response to very intense light.  To appreciate the importance of light adaptation, let us first consider what would  happen if the ganglion cell received a direct input from the cones that bypassed the  adaptation circuitry. A fundamental task for the visual system is to discriminate between  two stimuli to determine which has the higher light intensity. In the absence of light  adaptation, two stimuli L and L + A will produce the following ganglion cell response  difference 6G in the steady state:  6G=  5 0 ( L + A )  - - 5 0 ^ - .  (7.17)  1 3 ±( L ±A )  13±F  V  '  Suppose that at threshold human subjects can just discriminate between two light  intensities when 5G — 1, i.e. when the ganglion cell spike rate differs by a small criterion.  On the assumption that A is small at threshold, (7.17) can be expanded as a first order  Taylor series in A with the result:  - ^  This equation, first derived by Shapley and Enroth-Cugell (1984), shows that the smallest  discriminable difference in light intensity between two stimuli will increase with L~ as L  becomes large. Equation (7.18) is plotted as a function of light intensity L (in units of  trolands) by the dashed line in Fig. 7.8. The solid circles plot data from a study by Fin- kelstein, Harrison, and Hood (1990). These authors observed that retinal light adaptation  takes some time to develop, so briefly flashed stimuli can largely bypass the light adap- tation process, and the solid data points were gathered under these conditions. In con- sequence, discrimination thresholds get very large (i.e. very poor), and discrimination  102  Spikes, decisions, and actions  o  CO  CD  c  0)  E  CD  1000  1 00  0 1  —r 11 inn  1—i i i m n  r i i i n ill  Adapted  Data: Finkelstein et al (1990) •  " • • I  '  • ' ' " i l l  I  '  ' " " l l  I  I I • l l l l  1  1 0  1 0 0  1 0 0 0  1 0  1 0  Light Intensity (Td)  Fig. 7.8 Thresholds for detecting a brief light flash as a function of background light intensity. Solid circles  plot thresholds under conditions minimizing retinal light adaptation, while open circles show analogous  results for the fully adapted retina (Finkelstein et ai. 1990). Solid and dashed lines are the predictions of  (7.13) under adapted and unadapted conditions, respectively.  becomes impossible for light intensities to the right of the double-headed arrow. The  reason for this is saturation of the ganglion cell firing rate G.  One role of retinal light adaptation is to compress the neural input to the ganglion cells  so as to avoid response saturation. The MatLab program Retina.m implements a fourth  order Runge-Kutta simulation of (7.13). The program first requests a background light  adaptation level L to which the model will be adapted by solving (7.16) for the steady state  and then using this value to solve for the equilibrium values of all other variables in (7.14).  The program then requests a change in luminance A and this is abruptly added to the  background 100 ms into the simulation. If you run the simulation with L = 100 and A = 5.  you will see that there is a transient burst in ganglion cell (G) response to the increment  that reaches a value of 1.53 above the adapted level and then drops back to a new level  of adaptation. Given our previous assumption that the threshold value of A occurs when  the G cell increment is 1.0 above its former baseline, this represents a suprathreshold  response. By simulating responses to a number of smaller A values it is possible to home in 