example of one autonomous limit cycle driving a second limit cycle. This is why the  mathematical analysis is complex.  Our previous analysis of the Plant (1981) burster and the physiology of aplysia neurons  showed that the Ca2+ oscillations in V could be revealed using a mathematical version of  TTX application, and the same is true for the model in (10.5). In this case analysis of  simulated TTX poisoning of the Na+ conductance in (10.5) is developed in Exercise 2,  where you will see that slow membrane oscillations are indeed revealed.  10.5 A dynamical taxonomy of neurons  Our dynamical analysis has now covered the range of behaviors discovered in different  nerve cells from a wide range of species. Furthermore, this analysis enables us to specify  which aspects of membrane biophysics make each cell type unique. This section provides a  brief summary of the dynamical taxonomy that emerges from analysis of mammalian  neocortical neurons and from bursting.  The mammalian neocortex contains four classes of neurons differentiated with respect  to their spiking responses to sustained intracellular current injection: regular-spiking (RS)  cells, fast-spiking (FS) cells, bursting or chattering cells, and intrinsic-bursting (IB) cells  (Connors and Gutnick, 1990; Gutnick and Crill, 1995; Gray and McCormick, 1996). FS  neurons are the simplest of these dynamically, as they can be described by the two  equations in (9.10) with TR = 2.1 ms. These inhibitory interneurons in the cortex fire at  high rates due to their narrow action potentials and their lack of adaptation. RS neurons  are the next more complex cells, as they incorporate an /AHP potential that produces spike  frequency adaptation and a longer time-constant TR that results in broader action  potentials (see Fig. 9.11). The dynamical properties of RS neurons therefore require at  least the three equations in (10.1). Neocortical bursting cells (see Fig. 10.4C,D) are the  most complex dynamically, as they can only be described by four-dimensional dynamics  incorporating depolarizing /j and hyperpolarizing /AHP currents as described by eqn  (10.5). The final cortical neuron type, the IB cell, has dynamical properties intermediate  between RS and chattering neurons and can be generated from (10.5) by modest  parameter changes. Our models for these neocortical neuron classes are closely related  dynamically, as all share the same Fand R equations (except for the time constant TR).  They are differentiated by the presence of zero (FS), one (RS), or two (bursting) addi- tional currents that generate the patterning of the spike trains. While neocortical neurons  do possess about 12 different ionic currents (Gutnick and Crill, 1995; McCormick, 1998),  the essential nonlinear dynamics can be captured in four dimensions.  170  Spikes, decisions, and actions  A taxonomy of bursting neurons was first proposed by Rinzel (1987). Following his  classification and that of Bertram et al. (1995), the simplest type of bursting is  represented by the recurrent excitatory-inhibitory network oscillator in eqn (8.2) (Wilson  and Cowan, 1972). In this case bursting is represented by a spike rate that is periodically  terminated by inhibitory feedback. A second example of this simple bursting theme is  embodied in (8.20) which describes neural competition with adaptation. The next more  complicated burster is the Chay and Keizer (1983) model described by the three equations  in (10.2). The most complicated bursting neurons discovered thus far are the parabolic  bursters exemplified by the Plant (1981) model in (10.3). As we have seen, parabolic  bursting requires two fast dynamical variables, F and R, to describe action potential  generation plus two slower variables, A'and C, to describe the Ca2+-mediated Ij and /AHP  currents that produce endogenous membrane potential oscillations even in the presence  of TTX. Thus, we have explored the taxonomy of two-, three-, and four-dimensional  bursting behaviors proposed by Rinzel (1987). In subsequent chapters it will be shown  that networks incorporating neural bursting are extremely important in many forms of  motor control.  10.6  Exercises  1. As indicated in the chapter, the excitability of regular-spiking neurons can be con- trolled by various modulatory neurotransmitters. To explore the range of their possible  effects, consider the following modification of eqn (10.1):  d V  , 